Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Quintus/ftroy.html

The Fall of Troy
By Quintus


Translated by A. S. Way

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK I

How Died for Troy the Queen of the Amazons, Penthesileia

When godlike Hector by Peleides slain 
Passed, and the pyre had ravined up his flesh, 
And earth had veiled his bones, the Trojans then 
Tarried in Priam's city, sore afraid 
Before the might of stout-heart Aeacus' son: 
As kine they were, that midst the copses shrink 
From faring forth to meet a lion grim, 
But in dense thickets terror-huddled cower; 
So in their fortress shivered these to see 
That mighty man. Of those already dead 
They thought of all whose lives he reft away 
As by Scamander's outfall on he rushed, 
And all that in mid-flight to that high wall 
He slew, how he quelled Hector, how he haled 
His corse round Troy; -- yea, and of all beside 
Laid low by him since that first day whereon 
O'er restless seas he brought the Trojans doom. 
Ay, all these they remembered, while they stayed 
Thus in their town, and o'er them anguished grief 
Hovered dark-winged, as though that very day 
All Troy with shrieks were crumbling down in fire. 

Then from Thermodon, from broad-sweeping streams, 
Came, clothed upon with beauty of Goddesses, 
Penthesileia -- came athirst indeed 
For groan-resounding battle, but yet more 
Fleeing abhorred reproach and evil fame, 
Lest they of her own folk should rail on her 
Because of her own sister's death, for whom 
Ever her sorrows waxed, Hippolyte, 
Whom she had struck dead with her mighty spear, 
Not of her will -- 'twas at a stag she hurled. 
So came she to the far-famed land of Troy. 
Yea, and her warrior spirit pricked her on, 
Of murder's dread pollution thus to cleanse 
Her soul, and with such sacrifice to appease 
The Awful Ones, the Erinnyes, who in wrath 
For her slain sister straightway haunted her 
Unseen: for ever round the sinner's steps 
They hover; none may 'scape those Goddesses. 
And with her followed twelve beside, each one 
A princess, hot for war and battle grim, 
Far-famous each, yet handmaids unto her: 
Penthesileia far outshone them all. 
As when in the broad sky amidst the stars 
The moon rides over all pre-eminent, 
When through the thunderclouds the cleaving heavens 
Open, when sleep the fury-breathing winds; 
So peerless was she mid that charging host. 
Clonie was there, Polemusa, Derinoe, 
Evandre, and Antandre, and Bremusa, 
Hippothoe, dark-eyed Harmothoe, 
Alcibie, Derimacheia, Antibrote, 
And Thermodosa glorying with the spear. 
All these to battle fared with warrior-souled 
Penthesileia: even as when descends 
Dawn from Olympus' crest of adamant, 
Dawn, heart-exultant in her radiant steeds 
Amidst the bright-haired Hours; and o'er them all, 
How flawless-fair soever these may be, 
Her splendour of beauty glows pre-eminent; 
So peerless amid all the Amazons Unto 
Troy-town Penthesileia came. 
To right, to left, from all sides hurrying thronged 
The Trojans, greatly marvelling, when they saw 
The tireless War-god's child, the mailed maid, 
Like to the Blessed Gods; for in her face 
Glowed beauty glorious and terrible. 
Her smile was ravishing: beneath her brows 
Her love-enkindling eyes shone like to stars, 
And with the crimson rose of shamefastness 
Bright were her cheeks, and mantled over them 
Unearthly grace with battle-prowess clad. 

Then joyed Troy's folk, despite past agonies, 
As when, far-gazing from a height, the hinds 
Behold a rainbow spanning the wide sea, 
When they be yearning for the heaven-sent shower, 
When the parched fields be craving for the rain; 
Then the great sky at last is overgloomed, 
And men see that fair sign of coming wind 
And imminent rain, and seeing, they are glad, 
Who for their corn-fields' plight sore sighed before; 
Even so the sons of Troy when they beheld 
There in their land Penthesileia dread 
Afire for battle, were exceeding glad; 
For when the heart is thrilled with hope of good, 
All smart of evils past is wiped away: 
So, after all his sighing and his pain, 
Gladdened a little while was Priam's soul. 
As when a man who hath suffered many a pang 
From blinded eyes, sore longing to behold 
The light, and, if he may not, fain would die, 
Then at the last, by a cunning leech's skill, 
Or by a God's grace, sees the dawn-rose flush, 
Sees the mist rolled back from before his eyes, -- 
Yea, though clear vision come not as of old, 
Yet, after all his anguish, joys to have 
Some small relief, albeit the stings of pain 
Prick sharply yet beneath his eyelids; -- so 
Joyed the old king to see that terrible queen -- 
The shadowy joy of one in anguish whelmed 
For slain sons. Into his halls he led the Maid, 
And with glad welcome honoured her, as one 
Who greets a daughter to her home returned 
From a far country in the twentieth year; 
And set a feast before her, sumptuous 
As battle-glorious kings, who have brought low 
Nations of foes, array in splendour of pomp, 
With hearts in pride of victory triumphing. 
And gifts he gave her costly and fair to see, 
And pledged him to give many more, so she 
Would save the Trojans from the imminent doom. 
And she such deeds she promised as no man 
Had hoped for, even to lay Achilles low, 
To smite the wide host of the Argive men, 
And cast the brands red-flaming on the ships. 
Ah fool! -- but little knew she him, the lord 
Of ashen spears, how far Achilles' might 
In warrior-wasting strife o'erpassed her own! 

But when Andromache, the stately child 
Of king Eetion, heard the wild queen's vaunt, 
Low to her own soul bitterly murmured she: 
"Ah hapless! why with arrogant heart dost thou 
Speak such great swelling words? No strength is thine 
To grapple in fight with Peleus' aweless son. 
Nay, doom and swift death shall he deal to thee. 
Alas for thee! What madness thrills thy soul? 
Fate and the end of death stand hard by thee! 
Hector was mightier far to wield the spear 
Than thou, yet was for all his prowess slain, 
Slain for the bitter grief of Troy, whose folk 
The city through looked on him as a God. 
My glory and his noble parents' glory 
Was he while yet he lived -- O that the earth 
Over my dead face had been mounded high, 
Or ever through his throat the breath of life 
Followed the cleaving spear! But now have I 
Looked -- woe is me! -- on grief unutterable, 
When round the city those fleet-footed steeds 
Haled him, steeds of Achilles, who had made 
Me widowed of mine hero-husband, made 
My portion bitterness through all my days." 

So spake Eetion's lovely-ankled child 
Low to her own soul, thinking on her lord. 
So evermore the faithful-hearted wife 
Nurseth for her lost love undying grief. 

Then in swift revolution sweeping round 
Into the Ocean's deep stream sank the sun, 
And daylight died. So when the banqueters 
Ceased from the wine-cup and the goodly feast, 
Then did the handmaids spread in Priam's halls 
For Penthesileia dauntless-souled the couch 
Heart-cheering, and she laid her down to rest; 
And slumber mist-like overveiled her eyes [depths 
Like sweet dew dropping round. From heavens' blue 
Slid down the might of a deceitful dream 
At Pallas' hest, that so the warrior-maid 
Might see it, and become a curse to Troy 
And to herself, when strained her soul to meet; 
The whirlwind of the battle. In this wise 
The Trito-born, the subtle-souled, contrived: 
Stood o'er the maiden's head that baleful dream 
In likeness of her father, kindling her 
Fearlessly front to front to meet in fight 
Fleetfoot Achilles. And she heard the voice, 
And all her heart exulted, for she weened 
That she should on that dawning day achieve 
A mighty deed in battle's deadly toil 
Ah, fool, who trusted for her sorrow a dream 
Out of the sunless land, such as beguiles 
Full oft the travail-burdened tribes of men, 
Whispering mocking lies in sleeping ears, 
And to the battle's travail lured her then! 

But when the Dawn, the rosy-ankled, leapt 
Up from her bed, then, clad in mighty strength 
Of spirit, suddenly from her couch uprose 
Penthesileia. Then did she array 
Her shoulders in those wondrous-fashioned arms 
Given her of the War-god. First she laid 
Beneath her silver-gleaming knees the greaves 
Fashioned of gold, close-clipping the strong limbs. 
Her rainbow-radiant corslet clasped she then 
About her, and around her shoulders slung, 
With glory in her heart, the massy brand 
Whose shining length was in a scabbard sheathed 
Of ivory and silver. Next, her shield 
Unearthly splendid, caught she up, whose rim 
Swelled like the young moon's arching chariot-rail 
When high o'er Ocean's fathomless-flowing stream 
She rises, with the space half filled with light 
Betwixt her bowing horns. So did it shine 
Unutterably fair. Then on her head 
She settled the bright helmet overstreamed 
With a wild mane of golden-glistering hairs. 
So stood she, lapped about with flaming mail, 
In semblance like the lightning, which the might, 
The never-wearied might of Zeus, to earth 
Hurleth, what time he showeth forth to men 
Fury of thunderous-roaring rain, or swoop 
Resistless of his shouting host of winds. 
Then in hot haste forth of her bower to pass 
Caught she two javelins in the hand that grasped 
Her shield-band; but her strong right hand laid hold 
On a huge halberd, sharp of either blade, 
Which terrible Eris gave to Ares' child 
To be her Titan weapon in the strife 
That raveneth souls of men. Laughing for glee 
Thereover, swiftly flashed she forth the ring 
Of towers. Her coming kindled all the sons 
Of Troy to rush into the battle forth 
Which crowneth men with glory. Swiftly all 
Hearkened her gathering-ery, and thronging came, 
Champions, yea, even such as theretofore 
Shrank back from standing in the ranks of war 
Against Achilles the all-ravager. 
But she in pride of triumph on she rode 
Throned on a goodly steed and fleet, the gift 
Of Oreithyia, the wild North-wind's bride, 
Given to her guest the warrior-maid, what time 
She came to Thrace, a steed whose flying feet 
Could match the Harpies' wings. Riding thereon 
Penthesileia in her goodlihead 
Left the tall palaces of Troy behind. 
And ever were the ghastly-visaged Fates 
Thrusting her on into the battle, doomed 
To be her first against the Greeks -- and last! 
To right, to left, with unreturning feet 
The Trojan thousands followed to the fray, 
The pitiless fray, that death-doomed warrior-maid, 
Followed in throngs, as follow sheep the ram 
That by the shepherd's art strides before all. 
So followed they, with battle-fury filled, 
Strong Trojans and wild-hearted Amazons. 
And like Tritonis seemed she, as she went 
To meet the Giants, or as flasheth far 
Through war-hosts Eris, waker of onset-shouts. 
So mighty in the Trojans' midst she seemed, 
Penthesileia of the flying feet. 

Then unto Cronos' Son Laomedon's child 
Upraised his hands, his sorrow-burdened hands, 
Turning him toward the sky-encountering fane 
Of Zeus of Ida, who with sleepless eyes 
Looks ever down on Ilium; and he prayed: 
"Father, give ear! Vouchsafe that on this day 
Achaea's host may fall before the hands 
Of this our warrior-queen, the War-god's child; 
And do thou bring her back unscathed again 
Unto mine halls: we pray thee by the love 
Thou bear'st to Ares of the fiery heart 
Thy son, yea, to her also! is she not 
Most wondrous like the heavenly Goddesses? 
And is she not the child of thine own seed? 
Pity my stricken heart withal! Thou know'st 
All agonies I have suffered in the deaths 
Of dear sons whom the Fates have torn from me 
By Argive hands in the devouring fight. 
Compassionate us, while a remnant yet 
Remains of noble Dardanus' blood, while yet 
This city stands unwasted! Let us know 
From ghastly slaughter and strife one breathing-space!" 

In passionate prayer he spake: -- lo, with shrill scream

Swiftly to left an eagle darted by 
And in his talons bare a gasping dove. 
Then round the heart of Priam all the blood 
Was chilled with fear. Low to his soul he said: 
"Ne'er shall I see return alive from war 
Penthesileia!" On that selfsame day 
The Fates prepared his boding to fulfil; 
And his heart brake with anguish of despair. 

Marvelled the Argives, far across the plain 
Seeing the hosts of Troy charge down on them, 
And midst them Penthesileia, Ares' child. 
These seemed like ravening beasts that mid the hills 
Bring grimly slaughter to the fleecy flocks; 
And she, as a rushing blast of flame she seemed 
That maddeneth through the copses summer-scorched, 
When the wind drives it on; and in this wise 
Spake one to other in their mustering host: 
"Who shall this be who thus can rouse to war 
The Trojans, now that Hector hath been slain -- 
These who, we said, would never more find heart 
To stand against us? Lo now, suddenly 
Forth are they rushing, madly afire for fight! 
Sure, in their midst some great one kindleth them 
To battle's toil! Thou verily wouldst say 
This were a God, of such great deeds he dreams! 
Go to, with aweless courage let us arm 
Our own breasts: let us summon up our might 
In battle-fury. We shall lack not help 
Of Gods this day to close in fight with Troy." 

So cried they; and their flashing battle-gear 
Cast they about them: forth the ships they poured 
Clad in the rage of fight as with a cloak. 
Then front to front their battles closed, like beasts 
Of ravin, locked in tangle of gory strife. 
Clanged their bright mail together, clashed the spears, 
The corslets, and the stubborn-welded shields 
And adamant helms. Each stabbed at other's flesh 
With the fierce brass: was neither ruth nor rest, 
And all the Trojan soil was crimson-red. 

Then first Penthesileia smote and slew 
Molion; now Persinous falls, and now 
Eilissus; reeled Antitheus 'neath her spear 
The pride of Lernus quelled she: down she bore 
Hippalmus 'neath her horse-hoofs; Haemon's son 
Died; withered stalwart Elasippus' strength. 
And Derinoe laid low Laogonus, 
And Clonie Menippus, him who sailed 
Long since from Phylace, led by his lord 
Protesilaus to the war with Troy. 
Then was Podarces, son of Iphiclus, 
Heart-wrung with ruth and wrath to see him lie 
Dead, of all battle-comrades best-beloved. 
Swiftly at Clonie he hurled, the maid 
Fair as a Goddess: plunged the unswerving lance 
'Twixt hip and hip, and rushed the dark blood forth 
After the spear, and all her bowels gushed out. 
Then wroth was Penthesileia; through the brawn 
Of his right arm she drave the long spear's point, 
She shore atwain the great blood-brimming veins, 
And through the wide gash of the wound the gore 
Spirted, a crimson fountain. With a groan 
Backward he sprang, his courage wholly quelled 
By bitter pain; and sorrow and dismay 
Thrilled, as he fled, his men of Phylace. 
A short way from the fight he reeled aside, 
And in his friends' arms died in little space. 
Then with his lance Idomeneus thrust out, 
And by the right breast stabbed Bremusa. Stilled 
For ever was the beating of her heart. 
She fell, as falls a graceful-shafted pine 
Hewn mid the hills by woodmen: heavily, 
Sighing through all its boughs, it crashes down. 
So with a wailing shriek she fell, and death 
Unstrung her every limb: her breathing soul 
Mingled with multitudinous-sighing winds. 
Then, as Evandre through the murderous fray 
With Thermodosa rushed, stood Meriones, 
A lion in the path, and slew: his spear 
Right to the heart of one he drave, and one 
Stabbed with a lightning sword-thrust 'twixt the hips: 
Leapt through the wounds the life, and fled away. 
Oileus' fiery son smote Derinoe 
'Twixt throat and shoulder with his ruthless spear; 
And on Alcibie Tydeus' terrible son 
Swooped, and on Derimacheia: head with neck 
Clean from the shoulders of these twain he shore 
With ruin-wreaking brand. Together down 
Fell they, as young calves by the massy axe 
Of brawny flesher felled, that, shearing through 
The sinews of the neck, lops life away. 
So, by the hands of Tydeus' son laid low 
Upon the Trojan plain, far, far away 
From their own highland-home, they fell. Nor these 
Alone died; for the might of Sthenelus 
Down on them hurled Cabeirus' corse, who came 
From Sestos, keen to fight the Argive foe, 
But never saw his fatherland again. 
Then was the heart of Paris filled with wrath 
For a friend slain. Full upon Sthenelus 
Aimed he a shaft death-winged, yet touched him not, 
Despite his thirst for vengeance: otherwhere 
The arrow glanced aside, and carried death 
Whither the stern Fates guided its fierce wing, 
And slew Evenor brazen-tasleted, 
Who from Dulichium came to war with Troy. 
For his death fury-kindled was the son 
Of haughty Phyleus: as a lion leaps 
Upon the flock, so swiftly rushed he: all 
Shrank huddling back before that terrible man. 
Itymoneus he slew, and Hippasus' son 
Agelaus: from Miletus brought they war 
Against the Danaan men by Nastes led, 
The god-like, and Amphimachus mighty-souled. 
On Mycale they dwelt; beside their home 
Rose Latmus' snowy crests, stretched the long glens 
Of Branchus, and Panormus' water-meads. 
Maeander's flood deep-rolling swept thereby, 
Which from the Phrygian uplands, pastured o'er 
By myriad flocks, around a thousand forelands 
Curls, swirls, and drives his hurrying ripples on 
Down to the vine-clad land of Carian men 
These mid the storm of battle Meges slew, 
Nor these alone, but whomsoe'er his lance 
Black-shafted touched, were dead men; for his breast 
The glorious Trito-born with courage thrilled 
To bring to all his foes the day of doom. 
And Polypoetes, dear to Ares, slew 
Dresaeus, whom the Nymph Neaera bare 
To passing-wise Theiodamas for these 
Spread was the bed of love beside the foot 
Of Sipylus the Mountain, where the Gods 
Made Niobe a stony rock, wherefrom 
Tears ever stream: high up, the rugged crag 
Bows as one weeping, weeping, waterfalls 
Cry from far-echoing Hermus, wailing moan 
Of sympathy: the sky-encountering crests 
Of Sipylus, where alway floats a mist 
Hated of shepherds, echo back the cry. 
Weird marvel seems that Rock of Niobe 
To men that pass with feet fear-goaded: there 
They see the likeness of a woman bowed, 
In depths of anguish sobbing, and her tears 
Drop, as she mourns grief-stricken, endlessly. 
Yea, thou wouldst say that verily so it was, 
Viewing it from afar; but when hard by 
Thou standest, all the illusion vanishes; 
And lo, a steep-browed rock, a fragment rent 
From Sipylus -- yet Niobe is there, 
Dreeing her weird, the debt of wrath divine, 
A broken heart in guise of shattered stone. 

All through the tangle of that desperate fray 
Stalked slaughter and doom. The incarnate Onset-shout 
Raved through the rolling battle; at her side 
Paced Death the ruthless, and the Fearful Faces, 
The Fates, beside them strode, and in red hands 
Bare murder and the groans of dying men. 
That day the beating of full many a heart, 
Trojan and Argive, was for ever stilled, 
While roared the battle round them, while the fury 
Of Penthesileia fainted not nor failed; 
But as amid long ridges of lone hills 
A lioness, stealing down a deep ravine, 
Springs on the kine with lightning leap, athirst 
For blood wherein her fierce heart revelleth; 
So on the Danaans leapt that warrior-maid. 
And they, their souls were cowed: backward they shrank, 
And fast she followed, as a towering surge 
Chases across the thunder-booming sea 
A flying bark, whose white sails strain beneath 
The wind's wild buffering, and all the air 
Maddens with roaring, as the rollers crash 
On a black foreland looming on the lee 
Where long reefs fringe the surf-tormented shores. 
So chased she, and so dashed the ranks asunder 
Triumphant-souled, and hurled fierce threats before: 
"Ye dogs, this day for evil outrage done 
To Priam shall ye pay! No man of you 
Shall from mine hands deliver his own life, 
And win back home, to gladden parents eyes, 
Or comfort wife or children. Ye shall lie 
Dead, ravined on by vultures and by wolves, 
And none shall heap the earth-mound o'er your clay. 
Where skulketh now the strength of Tydeus' son, 
And where the might of Aeacus' scion? 
Where is Aias' bulk? Ye vaunt them mightiest men 
Of all your rabble. Ha! they will not dare 
With me to close in battle, lest I drag 
Forth from their fainting frames their craven souls!" 

Then heart-uplifted leapt she on the foe, 
Resistless as a tigress, crashing through 
Ranks upon ranks of Argives, smiting now 
With that huge halberd massy-headed, now 
Hurling the keen dart, while her battle-horse 
Flashed through the fight, and on his shoulder bare 
Quiver and bow death-speeding, close to her hand, 
If mid that revel of blood she willed to speed 
The bitter-biting shaft. Behind her swept 
The charging lines of men fleet-footed, friends 
And brethren of the man who never flinched 
From close death-grapple, Hector, panting all 
The hot breath of the War-god from their breasts, 
All slaying Danaans with the ashen spear, 
Who fell as frost-touched leaves in autumn fall 
One after other, or as drops of rain. 
And aye went up a moaning from earth's breast 
All blood-bedrenched, and heaped with corse on corse. 
Horses pierced through with arrows, or impaled 
On spears, were snorting forth their last of strength 
With screaming neighings. Men, with gnashing teeth 
Biting the dust, lay gasping, while the steeds 
Of Trojan charioteers stormed in pursuit, 
Trampling the dying mingled with the dead 
As oxen trample corn in threshing-floors. 

Then one exulting boasted mid the host 
Of Troy, beholding Penthesileia rush 
On through the foes' array, like the black storm 
That maddens o'er the sea, what time the sun 
Allies his might with winter's Goat-horned Star; 
And thus, puffed up with vain hope, shouted he: 
"O friends, in manifest presence down from heaven 
One of the deathless Gods this day hath come 
To fight the Argives, all of love for us, 
Yea, and with sanction of almighty Zeus, 
He whose compassion now remembereth 
Haply strong-hearted Priam, who may boast 
For his a lineage of immortal blood. 
For this, I trow, no mortal woman seems, 
Who is so aweless-daring, who is clad 
In splendour-flashing arms: nay, surely she 
Shall be Athene, or the mighty-souled 
Enyo -- haply Eris, or the Child 
Of Leto world-renowned. O yea, I look 
To see her hurl amid yon Argive men 
Mad-shrieking slaughter, see her set aflame 
Yon ships wherein they came long years agone 
Bringing us many sorrows, yea, they came 
Bringing us woes of war intolerable. 
Ha! to the home-land Hellas ne'er shall these 
With joy return, since Gods on our side fight." 

In overweening exultation so 
Vaunted a Trojan. Fool! -- he had no vision 
Of ruin onward rushing upon himself 
And Troy, and Penthesileia's self withal. 
For not as yet had any tidings come 
Of that wild fray to Aias stormy-souled, 
Nor to Achilles, waster of tower and town. 
But on the grave-mound of Menoetius' son 
They twain were lying, with sad memories 
Of a dear comrade crushed, and echoing 
Each one the other's groaning. One it was 
Of the Blest Gods who still was holding back 
These from the battle-tumult far away, 
Till many Greeks should fill the measure up 
Of woeful havoc, slain by Trojan foes 
And glorious Penthesileia, who pursued 
With murderous intent their rifled ranks, 
While ever waxed her valour more and more, 
And waxed her might within her: never in vain 
She aimed the unswerving spear-thrust: aye she pierced 
The backs of them that fled, the breasts of such 
As charged to meet her. All the long shaft dripped 
With steaming blood. Swift were her feet as wind 
As down she swooped. Her aweless spirit failed 
For weariness nor fainted, but her might 
Was adamantine. The impending Doom, 
Which roused unto the terrible strife not yet 
Achilles, clothed her still with glory; still 
Aloof the dread Power stood, and still would shed 
Splendour of triumph o'er the death-ordained 
But for a little space, ere it should quell 
That Maiden 'neath the hands of Aeaeus' son. 
In darkness ambushed, with invisible hand 
Ever it thrust her on, and drew her feet 
Destruction-ward, and lit her path to death 
With glory, while she slew foe after foe. 
As when within a dewy garden-close, 
Longing for its green springtide freshness, leaps 
A heifer, and there rangeth to and fro, 
When none is by to stay her, treading down 
All its green herbs, and all its wealth of bloom, 
Devouring greedily this, and marring that 
With trampling feet; so ranged she, Ares' child, 
Through reeling squadrons of Achaea's sons, 
Slew these, and hunted those in panic rout. 

From Troy afar the women marvelling gazed 
At the Maid's battle-prowess. Suddenly 
A fiery passion for the fray hath seized 
Antimachus' daughter, Meneptolemus' wife, 
Tisiphone. Her heart waxed strong, and filled 
With lust of fight she cried to her fellows all, 
With desperate-daring words, to spur them on 
To woeful war, by recklessness made strong. 
"Friends, let a heart of valour in our breasts 
Awake! Let us be like our lords, who fight 
With foes for fatherland, for babes, for us, 
And never pause for breath in that stern strife! 
Let us too throne war's spirit in our hearts! 
Let us too face the fight which favoureth none! 
For we, we women, be not creatures cast 
In diverse mould from men: to us is given 
Such energy of life as stirs in them. 
Eyes have we like to theirs, and limbs: throughout 
Fashioned we are alike: one common light 
We look on, and one common air we breathe: 
With like food are we nourished -- nay, wherein 
Have we been dowered of God more niggardly 
Than men? Then let us shrink not from the fray 
See ye not yonder a woman far excelling 
Men in the grapple of fight? Yet is her blood 
Nowise akin to ours, nor fighteth she 
For her own city. For an alien king 
She warreth of her own heart's prompting, fears 
The face of no man; for her soul is thrilled 
With valour and with spirit invincible. 
But we -- to right, to left, lie woes on woes 
About our feet: this mourns beloved sons, 
And that a husband who for hearth and home 
Hath died; some wail for fathers now no more; 
Some grieve for brethren and for kinsmen lost. 
Not one but hath some share in sorrow's cup. 
Behind all this a fearful shadow looms, 
The day of bondage! Therefore flinch not ye 
From war, O sorrow-laden! Better far 
To die in battle now, than afterwards 
Hence to be haled into captivity 
To alien folk, we and our little ones, 
In the stern grip of fate leaving behind 
A burning city, and our husbands' graves." 

So cried she, and with passion for stern war 
Thrilled all those women; and with eager speed 
They hasted to go forth without the wall 
Mail-clad, afire to battle for their town 
And people: all their spirit was aflame. 
As when within a hive, when winter-tide 
Is over and gone, loud hum the swarming bees 
What time they make them ready forth to fare 
To bright flower-pastures, and no more endure 
To linger therewithin, but each to other 
Crieth the challenge-cry to sally forth; 
Even so bestirred themselves the women of Troy, 
And kindled each her sister to the fray. 
The weaving-wool, the distaff far they flung, 
And to grim weapons stretched their eager hands. 

And now without the city these had died 
In that wild battle, as their husbands died 
And the strong Amazons died, had not one voice 
Of wisdom cried to stay their maddened feet, 
When with dissuading words Theano spake: 
"Wherefore, ah wherefore for the toil and strain 
Of battle's fearful tumult do ye yearn, 
Infatuate ones? Never your limbs have toiled 
In conflict yet. In utter ignoranee 
Panting for labour unendurable, 
Ye rush on all-unthinking; for your strength 
Can never be as that of Danaan men, 
Men trained in daily battle. Amazons 
Have joyed in ruthless fight, in charging steeds, 
From the beginning: all the toil of men 
Do they endure; and therefore evermore 
The spirit of the War-god thrills them through. 
'They fall not short of men in anything: 
Their labour-hardened frames make great their hearts 
For all achievement: never faint their knees 
Nor tremble. Rumour speaks their queen to be 
A daughter of the mighty Lord of War. 
Therefore no woman may compare with her 
In prowess -- if she be a woman, not 
A God come down in answer to our prayers. 
Yea, of one blood be all the race of men, 
Yet unto diverse labours still they turn; 
And that for each is evermore the best 
Whereto he bringeth skill of use and wont. 
Therefore do ye from tumult of the fray 
Hold you aloof, and in your women's bowers 
Before the loom still pace ye to and fro; 
And war shall be the business of our lords. 
Lo, of fair issue is there hope: we see 
The Achaeans falling fast: we see the might 
Of our men waxing ever: fear is none 
Of evil issue now: the pitiless foe 
Beleaguer not the town: no desperate need 
There is that women should go forth to war." 

So cried she, and they hearkened to the words 
Of her who had garnered wisdom from the years; 
So from afar they watched the fight. But still 
Penthesileia brake the ranks, and still 
Before her quailed the Achaeans: still they found 
Nor screen nor hiding-place from imminent death. 
As bleating goats are by the blood-stained jaws 
Of a grim panther torn, so slain were they. 
In each man's heart all lust of battle died, 
And fear alone lived. This way, that way fled 
The panic-stricken: some to earth had flung 
The armour from their shoulders; some in dust 
Grovelled in terror 'neath their shields: the steeds 
Fled through the rout unreined of charioteers. 
In rapture of triumph charged the Amazons, 
With groan and scream of agony died the Greeks. 
Withered their manhood was in that sore strait; 
Brief was the span of all whom that fierce maid 
Mid the grim jaws of battle overtook. 
As when with mighty roaring bursteth down 
A storm upon the forest-trees, and some 
Uprendeth by the roots, and on the earth 
Dashes them down, the tail stems blossom-crowned, 
And snappeth some athwart the trunk, and high 
Whirls them through air, till all confused they lie 
A ruin of splintered stems and shattered sprays; 
So the great Danaan host lay, dashed to dust 
By doom of Fate, by Penthesileia's spear. 

But when the very ships were now at point 
To be by hands of Trojans set aflame, 
Then battle-bider Aias heard afar 
The panic-cries, and spake to Aeacus' son: 
"Achilles, all the air about mine ears 
Is full of multitudinous eries, is full 
Of thunder of battle rolling nearer aye. 
Let us go forth then, ere the Trojans win 
Unto the ships, and make great slaughter there 
Of Argive men, and set the ships aflame. 
Foulest reproach such thing on thee and me 
Should bring; for it beseems not that the seed 
Of mighty Zeus should shame the sacred blood 
Of hero-fathers, who themselves of old 
With Hercules the battle-eager sailed 
To Troy, and smote her even at her height 
Of glory, when Laomedon was king. 
Ay, and I ween that our hands even now 
Shall do the like: we too are mighty men." 

He spake: the aweless strength of Aeacus' son 
Hearkened thereto, for also to his ears 
By this the roar of bitter battle came. 
Then hasted both, and donned their warrior-gear 
All splendour-gleaming: now, in these arrayed 
Facing that stormy-tossing rout they stand. 
Loud clashed their glorious armour: in their souls 
A battle-fury like the War-god's wrath 
Maddened; such might was breathed into these twain 
By Atrytone, Shaker of the Shield, 
As on they pressed. With joy the Argives saw 
The coming of that mighty twain: they seemed 
In semblance like A1oeus' giant sons 
Who in the old time made that haughty vaunt 
Of piling on Olympus' brow the height 
Of Ossa steeply-towering, and the crest 
Of sky-encountering Pelion, so to rear 
A mountain-stair for their rebellious rage 
To scale the highest heaven. Huge as these 
The sons of Aeacus seemed, as forth they strode 
To stem the tide of war. A gladsome sight 
To friends who have fainted for their coming, now 
Onward they press to crush triumphant foes. 
Many they slew with their resistless spears; 
As when two herd-destroying lions come 
On sheep amid the copses feeding, far 
From help of shepherds, and in heaps on heaps 
Slay them, till they have drunken to the full 
Of blood, and filled their maws insatiate 
With flesh, so those destroyers twain slew on, 
Spreading wide havoc through the hosts of Troy. 

There Deiochus and gallant Hyllus fell 
By Alas slain, and fell Eurynomus 
Lover of war, and goodly Enyeus died. 
But Peleus' son burst on the Amazons 
Smiting Antandre, Polemusa then, 
Antibrote, fierce-souled Hippothoe, 
Hurling Harmothoe down on sisters slain. 
Then hard on all their-reeling ranks he pressed 
With Telamon's mighty-hearted son; and now 
Before their hands battalions dense and strong 
Crumbled as weakly and as suddenly 
As when in mountain-folds the forest-brakes 
Shrivel before a tempest-driven fire. 

When battle-eager Penthesileia saw 
These twain, as through the scourging storm of war 
Like ravening beasts they rushed, to meet them there 
She sped, as when a leopard grim, whose mood 
Is deadly, leaps from forest-coverts forth, 
Lashing her tail, on hunters closing round, 
While these, in armour clad, and putting trust 
In their long spears, await her lightning leap; 
So did those warriors twain with spears upswung 
Wait Penthesileia. Clanged the brazen plates 
About their shoulders as they moved. And first 
Leapt the long-shafted lance sped from the hand 
Of goodly Penthesileia. Straight it flew 
To the shield of Aeacus' son, but glancing thence 
This way and that the shivered fragments sprang 
As from a rock-face: of such temper were 
The cunning-hearted Fire-god's gifts divine. 
Then in her hand the warrior-maid swung up 
A second javelin fury-winged, against 
Aias, and with fierce words defied the twain: 
"Ha, from mine hand in vain one lance hath leapt! 
But with this second look I suddenly 
To quell the strength and courage of two foes, -- 
Ay, though ye vaunt you mighty men of war 
Amid your Danaans! Die ye shall, and so 
Lighter shall be the load of war's affliction 
That lies upon the Trojan chariot-lords. 
Draw nigh, come through the press to grips with me, 
So shall ye learn what might wells up in breasts 
Of Amazons. With my blood is mingled war! 
No mortal man begat me, but the Lord 
Of War, insatiate of the battle-cry. 
Therefore my might is more than any man's." 

With scornful laughter spake she: then she hurled 
Her second lance; but they in utter scorn 
Laughed now, as swiftly flew the shaft, and smote 
The silver greave of Aias, and was foiled 
Thereby, and all its fury could not scar 
The flesh within; for fate had ordered not 
That any blade of foes should taste the blood 
Of Aias in the bitter war. But he 
Recked of the Amazon naught, but turned him thence 
To rush upon the Trojan host, and left 
Penthesileia unto Peleus' son 
Alone, for well he knew his heart within 
That she, for all her prowess, none the less 
Would cost Achilles battle-toil as light, 
As effortless, as doth the dove the hawk. 

Then groaned she an angry groan that she had sped 
Her shafts in vain; and now with scoffing speech 
To her in turn the son of Peleus spake: 
"Woman, with what vain vauntings triumphing 
Hast thou come forth against us, all athirst 
To battle with us, who be mightier far 
Than earthborn heroes? We from Cronos' Son, 
The Thunder-roller, boast our high descent. 
Ay, even Hector quailed, the battle-swift, 
Before us, e'en though far away he saw 
Our onrush to grim battle. Yea, my spear 
Slew him, for all his might. But thou -- thine heart 
Is utterly mad, that thou hast greatly dared 
To threaten us with death this day! On thee 
Thy latest hour shall swiftly come -- is come! 
Thee not thy sire the War-god now shall pluck 
Out of mine hand, but thou the debt shalt pay 
Of a dark doom, as when mid mountain-folds 
A pricket meets a lion, waster of herds. 
What, woman, hast thou heard not of the heaps 
Of slain, that into Xanthus' rushing stream 
Were thrust by these mine hands? -- or hast thou heard 
In vain, because the Blessed Ones have stol'n 
Wit and discretion from thee, to the end 
That Doom's relentless gulf might gape for thee?" 

He spake; he swung up in his mighty hand 
And sped the long spear warrior-slaying, wrought 
By Chiron, and above the right breast pierced 
The battle-eager maid. The red blood leapt 
Forth, as a fountain wells, and all at once 
Fainted the strength of Penthesileia's limbs; 
Dropped the great battle-axe from her nerveless hand; 
A mist of darkness overveiled her eyes, 
And anguish thrilled her soul. Yet even so 
Still drew she difficult breath, still dimly saw 
The hero, even now in act to drag 
Her from the swift steed's back. Confusedly 
She thought: "Or shall I draw my mighty sword, 
And bide Achilles' fiery onrush, or 
Hastily cast me from my fleet horse down 
To earth, and kneel unto this godlike man, 
And with wild breath promise for ransoming 
Great heaps of brass and gold, which pacify 
The hearts of victors never so athirst 
For blood, if haply so the murderous might 
Of Aeacus' son may hearken and may spare, 
Or peradventure may compassionate 
My youth, and so vouchsafe me to behold 
Mine home again? -- for O, I long to live!" 

So surged the wild thoughts in her; but the Gods 
Ordained it otherwise. Even now rushed on 
In terrible anger Peleus' son: he thrust 
With sudden spear, and on its shaft impaled 
The body of her tempest-footed steed, 
Even as a man in haste to sup might pierce 
Flesh with the spit, above the glowing hearth 
To roast it, or as in a mountain-glade 
A hunter sends the shaft of death clear through 
The body of a stag with such winged speed 
That the fierce dart leaps forth beyond, to plunge 
Into the tall stem of an oak or pine. 
So that death-ravening spear of Peleus' son 
Clear through the goodly steed rushed on, and pierced 
Penthesileia. Straightway fell she down 
Into the dust of earth, the arms of death, 
In grace and comeliness fell, for naught of shame 
Dishonoured her fair form. Face down she lay 
On the long spear outgasping her last breath, 
Stretched upon that fleet horse as on a couch; 
Like some tall pine snapped by the icy mace 
Of Boreas, earth's forest-fosterling 
Reared by a spring to stately height, amidst 
Long mountain-glens, a glory of mother earth; 
So from the once fleet steed low fallen lay 
Penthesileia, all her shattered strength 
Brought down to this, and all her loveliness. 

Now when the Trojans saw the Warrior-queen 
Struck down in battle, ran through all their lines 
A shiver of panic. Straightway to their walls 
Turned they in flight, heart-agonized with grief. 
As when on the wide sea, 'neath buffetings 
Of storm-blasts, castaways whose ship is wrecked 
Escape, a remnant of a crew, forspent 
With desperate conflict with the cruel sea: 
Late and at last appears the land hard by, 
Appears a city: faint and weary-limbed 
With that grim struggle, through the surf they strain 
To land, sore grieving for the good ship 1ost, 
And shipmates whom the terrible surge dragged down 
To nether gloom; so, Troyward as they fled 
From battle, all those Trojans wept for her, 
The Child of the resistless War-god, wept 
For friends who died in groan-resounding fight. 

Then over her with scornful laugh the son 
Of Peleus vaunted: "In the dust lie there 
A prey to teeth of dogs, to ravens' beaks, 
Thou wretched thing! Who cozened thee to come 
Forth against me? And thoughtest thou to fare 
Home from the war alive, to bear with thee 
Right royal gifts from Priam the old king, 
Thy guerdon for slain Argives? Ha, 'twas not 
The Immortals who inspired thee with this thought, 
Who know that I of heroes mightiest am, 
The Danaans' light of safety, but a woe 
To Trojans and to thee, O evil-starred! 
Nay, but it was the darkness-shrouded Fates 
And thine own folly of soul that pricked thee on 
To leave the works of women, and to fare 
To war, from which strong men shrink shuddering back." 

So spake he, and his ashen spear the son 
Of Peleus drew from that swift horse, and from 
Penthesileia in death's agony. 
Then steed and rider gasped their lives away 
Slain by one spear. Now from her head he plucked 
The helmet splendour-flashing like the beams 
Of the great sun, or Zeus' own glory-light. 
Then, there as fallen in dust and blood she lay, 
Rose, like the breaking of the dawn, to view 
'Neath dainty-pencilled brows a lovely face, 
Lovely in death. The Argives thronged around, 
And all they saw and marvelled, for she seemed 
Like an Immortal. In her armour there 
Upon the earth she lay, and seemed the Child 
Of Zeus, the tireless Huntress Artemis 
Sleeping, what time her feet forwearied are 
With following lions with her flying shafts 
Over the hills far-stretching. She was made 
A wonder of beauty even in her death 
By Aphrodite glorious-crowned, the Bride 
Of the strong War-god, to the end that he, 
The son of noble Peleus, might be pierced 
With the sharp arrow of repentant love. 
The warriors gazed, and in their hearts they prayed 
That fair and sweet like her their wives might seem, 
Laid on the bed of love, when home they won. 
Yea, and Achilles' very heart was wrung 
With love's remorse to have slain a thing so sweet, 
Who might have borne her home, his queenly bride, 
To chariot-glorious Phthia; for she was 
Flawless, a very daughter of the Gods, 
Divinely tall, and most divinely fair. 

Then Ares' heart was thrilled with grief and rage 
For his child slain. Straight from Olympus down 
He darted, swift and bright as thunderbolt 
Terribly flashing from the mighty hand Of 
Zeus, far leaping o'er the trackless sea, 
Or flaming o'er the land, while shuddereth 
All wide Olympus as it passeth by. 
So through the quivering air with heart aflame 
Swooped Ares armour-clad, soon as he heard 
The dread doom of his daughter. For the Gales, 
The North-wind's fleet-winged daughters, bare to him, 
As through the wide halls of the sky he strode, 
The tidings of the maiden's woeful end. 
Soon as he heard it, like a tempest-blast 
Down to the ridges of Ida leapt he: quaked 
Under his feet the long glens and ravines 
Deep-scored, all Ida's torrent-beds, and all 
Far-stretching foot-hills. Now had Ares brought 
A day of mourning on the Myrmidons, 
But Zeus himself from far Olympus sent 
Mid shattering thunders terror of levin-bolts 
Which thick and fast leapt through the welkin down 
Before his feet, blazing with fearful flames. 
And Ares saw, and knew the stormy threat 
Of the mighty-thundering Father, and he stayed 
His eager feet, now on the very brink 
Of battle's turmoil. As when some huge crag 
Thrust from a beetling cliff-brow by the winds 
And torrent rains, or lightning-lance of Zeus, 
Leaps like a wild beast, and the mountain-glens 
Fling back their crashing echoes as it rolls 
In mad speed on, as with resistless swoop 
Of bound on bound it rushes down, until 
It cometh to the levels of the plain, 
And there perforce its stormy flight is stayed; 

So Ares, battle-eager Son of Zeus, 
Was stayed, how loth soe'er; for all the Gods 
To the Ruler of the Blessed needs must yield, 
Seeing he sits high-throned above them all, 
Clothed in his might unspeakable. Yet still 
Many a wild thought surged through Ares' soul, 
Urging him now to dread the terrible threat 
Of Cronos' wrathful Son, and to return 
Heavenward, and now to reck not of his Sire, 
But with Achilles' blood to stain those hands, 
The battle-tireless. At the last his heart 
Remembered how that many and many a son 
Of Zeus himself in many a war had died, 
Nor in their fall had Zeus availed them aught. 
Therefore he turned him from the Argives -- else, 
Down smitten by the blasting thunderbolt, 
With Titans in the nether gloom he had lain, 
Who dared defy the eternal will of Zeus. 

Then did the warrior sons of Argos strip 
With eager haste from corpses strown all round 
The blood-stained spoils. But ever Peleus' son 
Gazed, wild with all regret, still gazed on her, 
The strong, the beautiful, laid in the dust; 
And all his heart was wrung, was broken down 
With sorrowing love, deep, strong as he had known 
When that beloved friend Patroclus died. 

Loud jeered Thersites, mocking to his face: 
"Thou sorry-souled Achilles! art not shamed 
To let some evil Power beguile thine heart 
To pity of a pitiful Amazon 
Whose furious spirit purposed naught but ill 
To us and ours? Ha, woman-mad art thou, 
And thy soul lusts for this thing, as she were 
Some lady wise in household ways, with gifts 
And pure intent for honoured wedlock wooed! 
Good had it been had her spear reached thine heart, 
The heart that sighs for woman-creatures still! 
Thou carest not, unmanly-souled, not thou, 
For valour's glorious path, when once thine eye 
Lights on a woman! Sorry wretch, where now 
Is all thy goodly prowess? where thy wit? 
And where the might that should beseem a king 
All-stainless? Dost not know what misery 
This self-same woman-madness wrought for Troy? 
Nothing there is to men more ruinous 
Than lust for woman's beauty; it maketh fools 
Of wise men. But the toil of war attains 
Renown. To him that is a hero indeed 
Glory of victory and the War-god's works 
Are sweet. 'Tis but the battle-blencher craves 
The beauty and the bed of such as she!" 

So railed he long and loud: the mighty heart 
Of Peleus' son leapt into flame of wrath. 
A sudden buffet of his resistless hand 
Smote 'neath the railer's ear, and all his teeth 
Were dashed to the earth: he fell upon his face: 
Forth of his lips the blood in torrent gushed: 
Swift from his body fled the dastard soul 
Of that vile niddering. Achaea's sons 
Rejoiced thereat, for aye he wont to rail 
On each and all with venomous gibes, himself 
A scandal and the shame of all the host. 
Then mid the warrior Argives cried a voice: 
"Not good it is for baser men to rail 
On kings, or secretly or openly; 
For wrathful retribution swiftly comes. 
The Lady of Justice sits on high; and she 
Who heapeth woe on woe on humankind, 
Even Ate, punisheth the shameless tongue." 

So mid the Danaans cried a voice: nor yet 
Within the mighty soul of Peleus' son 
Lulled was the storm of wrath, but fiercely he spake: 
"Lie there in dust, thy follies all forgot! 
'Tis not for knaves to beard their betters: once 
Thou didst provoke Odysseus' steadfast soul, 
Babbling with venomous tongue a thousand gibes, 
And didst escape with life; but thou hast found 
The son of Peleus not so patient-souled, 
Who with one only buffet from his hand 
Unkennels thy dog's soul! A bitter doom 
Hath swallowed thee: by thine own rascalry 
Thy life is sped. Hence from Achaean men, 
And mouth out thy revilings midst the dead!" 

So spake the valiant-hearted aweless son 
Of Aeacus. But Tydeus' son alone 
Of all the Argives was with anger stirred 
Against Achilles for Thersites slain, 
Seeing these twain were of the self-same blood, 
The one, proud Tydeus' battle-eager son, 
The other, seed of godlike Agrius: 
Brother of noble Oeneus Agrius was; 
And Oeneus in the Danaan land begat 
Tydeus the battle-eager, son to whom 
Was stalwart Diomedes. Therefore wroth 
Was he for slain Thersites, yea, had raised 
Against the son of Peleus vengeful hands, 
Exeept the noblest of Aehaea's sons 
Had thronged around him, and besought him sore, 
And held him back therefrom. With Peleus' son 
Also they pleaded; else those mighty twain, 
The mightiest of all Argives, were at point 
To close with clash of swords, so stung were they 
With bitter wrath; yet hearkened they at last 
To prayers of comrades, and were reconciled. 

Then of their pity did the Atreid kings -- 
For these too at the imperial loveliness 
Of Penthesileia marvelled -- render up 
Her body to the men of Troy, to bear 
Unto the burg of Ilus far-renowned 
With all her armour. For a herald came 
Asking this boon for Priam; for the king 
Longed with deep yearning of the heart to lay 
That battle-eager maiden, with her arms, 
And with her war-horse, in the great earth-mound 
Of old Laomedon. And so he heaped 
A high broad pyre without the city wall: 
Upon the height thereof that warrior-queen 
They laid, and costly treasures did they heap 
Around her, all that well beseems to burn 
Around a mighty queen in battle slain. 
And so the Fire-god's swift-upleaping might, 
The ravening flame, consumed her. All around 
The people stood on every hand, and quenched 
The pyre with odorous wine. Then gathered they 
The bones, and poured sweet ointment over them, 
And laid them in a casket: over all 
Shed they the rich fat of a heifer, chief 
Among the herds that grazed on Ida's slope. 
And, as for a beloved daughter, rang 
All round the Trojan men's heart-stricken wail, 
As by the stately wall they buried her 
On an outstanding tower, beside the bones 
Of old Laomedon, a queen beside 
A king. This honour for the War-god's sake 
They rendered, and for Penthesileia's own. 
And in the plain beside her buried they 
The Amazons, even all that followed her 
To battle, and by Argive spears were slain. 
For Atreus' sons begrudged not these the boon 
Of tear-besprinkled graves, but let their friends, 
The warrior Trojans, draw their corpses forth, 
Yea, and their own slain also, from amidst 
The swath of darts o'er that grim harvest-field. 
Wrath strikes not at the dead: pitied are foes 
When life has fled, and left them foes no more. 

Far off across the plain the while uprose 
Smoke from the pyres whereon the Argives laid 
The many heroes overthrown and slain 
By Trojan hands what time the sword devoured; 
And multitudinous lamentation wailed 
Over the perished. But above the rest 
Mourned they o'er brave Podarces, who in fight 
Was no less mighty than his hero-brother 
Protesilaus, he who long ago 
Fell, slain of Hector: so Podarces now, 
Struck down by Penthesileia's spear, hath cast 
Over all Argive hearts the pall of grief. 
Wherefore apart from him they laid in clay 
The common throng of slain; but over him 
Toiling they heaped an earth-mound far-descried 
In memory of a warrior aweless-souled. 
And in a several pit withal they thrust 
The niddering Thersites' wretched corse. 
Then to the ships, acclaiming Aeacus' son, 
Returned they all. But when the radiant day 
Had plunged beneath the Ocean-stream, and night, 
The holy, overspread the face of earth, 
Then in the rich king Agamemnon's tent 
Feasted the might of Peleus' son, and there 
Sat at the feast those other mighty ones 
All through the dark, till rose the dawn divine. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK II

How Memnon, Son of the Dawn, for Troy's Sake Fell in the Battle

When o'er the crests of the far-echoing hills 
The splendour of the tireless-racing sun 
Poured o'er the land, still in their tents rejoiced 
Achaea's stalwart sons, and still acclaimed 
Achilles the resistless. But in Troy 
Still mourned her people, still from all her towers 
Seaward they strained their gaze; for one great fear 
Gripped all their hearts -- to see that terrible man 
At one bound overleap their high-built wall, 
Then smite with the sword all people therewithin, 
And burn with fire fanes, palaces, and homes. 
And old Thymoetes spake to the anguished ones: 
"Friends, I have lost hope: mine heart seeth not 
Or help, or bulwark from the storm of war, 
Now that the aweless Hector, who was once 
Troy's mighty champion, is in dust laid low. 
Not all his might availed to escape the Fates, 
But overborne he was by Achilles' hands, 
The hands that would, I verily deem, bear down 
A God, if he defied him to the fight, 
Even as he overthrew this warrior-queen 
Penthesileia battle-revelling, 
From whom all other Argives shrank in fear. 
Ah, she was marvellous! When at the first 
I looked on her, meseemed a Blessed One 
From heaven had come down hitherward to bring 
Light to our darkness -- ah, vain hope, vain dream! 
Go to, let us take counsel, what to do 
Were best for us. Or shall we still maintain 
A hopeless fight against these ruthless foes, 
Or shall we straightway flee a city doomed? 
Ay, doomed! -- for never more may we withstand 
Argives in fighting field, when in the front 
Of battle pitiless Achilles storms." 

Then spake Laomedon's son, the ancient king: 
"Nay, friend, and all ye other sons of Troy, 
And ye our strong war-helpers, flinch we not 
Faint-hearted from defence of fatherland! 
Yet let us go not forth the city-gates 
To battle with yon foe. Nay, from our towers 
And from our ramparts let us make defence, 
Till our new champion come, the stormy heart 
Of Memnon. Lo, he cometh, leading on 
Hosts numberless, Aethiopia's swarthy sons. 
By this, I trow, he is nigh unto our gates; 
For long ago, in sore distress of soul, 
I sent him urgent summons. Yea, and he 
Promised me, gladly promised me, to come 
To Troy, and make all end of all our woes. 
And now, I trust, he is nigh. Let us endure 
A little longer then; for better far 
It is like brave men in the fight to die 
Than flee, and live in shame mid alien fo1k." 

So spake the old king; but Polydamas, 
The prudent-hearted, thought not good to war 
Thus endlessly, and spake his patriot rede: 
"If Memnon have beyond all shadow of doubt 
Pledged him to thrust dire ruin far from us, 
Then do I gainsay not that we await 
The coming of that godlike man within 
Our walls -- yet, ah, mine heart misgives me, lest, 
Though he with all his warriors come, he come 
But to his death, and unto thousands more, 
Our people, nought but misery come thereof; 
For terribly against us leaps the storm 
Of the Achaeans' might. But now, go to, 
Let us not flee afar from this our Troy 
To wander to some alien land, and there, 
In the exile's pitiful helplessness, endure 
All flouts and outrage; nor in our own land 
Abide we till the storm of Argive war 
O'erwhelm us. Nay, even now, late though it be, 
Better it were for us to render back 
Unto the Danaans Helen and her wealth, 
Even all that glory of women brought with her 
From Sparta, and add other treasure -- yea, 
Repay it twofold, so to save our Troy 
And our own souls, while yet the spoiler's hand 
Is laid not on our substance, and while yet 
Troy hath not sunk in gulfs of ravening flame. 
I pray you, take to heart my counsel! None 
Shall, well I wot, be given to Trojan men 
Better than this. Ah, would that long ago 
Hector had hearkened to my pleading, when 
I fain had kept him in the ancient home!" 

So spake Polydamas the noble and strong, 
And all the listening Trojans in their hearts 
Approved; yet none dared utter openly 
The word, for all with trembling held in awe 
Their prince and Helen, though for her sole sake 
Daily they died. But on that noble man 
Turned Paris, and reviled him to his face: 
"Thou dastard battle-blencher Polydamas! 
Not in thy craven bosom beats a heart 
That bides the fight, but only fear and panic. 
Yet dost thou vaunt thee -- quotha! -- still our best 
In counsel! -- no man's soul is base as thine! 
Go to, thyself shrink shivering from the strife! 
Cower, coward, in thine halls! But all the rest, 
We men, will still go armour-girt, until 
We wrest from this our truceless war a peace 
That shall not shame us! 'Tis with travail and toil 
Of strenuous war that brave men win renown; 
But flight? -- weak women choose it, and young babes! 
Thy spirit is like to theirs. No whit I trust 
Thee in the day of battle -- thee, the man 
Who maketh faint the hearts of all the host!" 

So fiercely he reviled: Polydamas 
Wrathfully answered; for he shrank not, he, 
From answering to his face. A caitiff hound, 
A reptile fool, is he who fawns on men 
Before their faces, while his heart is black 
With malice, and, when they be gone, his tongue 
Backbites them. Openly Polydamas 
Flung back upon the prince his taunt and scoff: 
"O thou of living men most mischievous! 
Thy valour -- quotha! -- brings us misery! 
Thine heart endures, and will endure, that strife 
Should have no limit, save in utter ruin 
Of fatherland and people for thy sake! 
Ne'er may such wantwit valour craze my soul! 
Be mine to cherish wise discretion aye, 
A warder that shall keep mine house in peace." 

Indignantly he spake, and Paris found 
No word to answer him, for conscience woke 
Remembrance of all woes he had brought on Troy, 
And should bring; for his passion-fevered heart 
Would rather hail quick death than severance 
From Helen the divinely fair, although 
For her sake was it that the sons of Troy 
Even then were gazing from their towers to see 
The Argives and Achilles drawing nigh. 

But no long time thereafter came to them 
Memnon the warrior-king, and brought with him 
A countless host of swarthy Aethiops. 
From all the streets of Troy the Trojans flocked 
Glad-eyed to gaze on him, as seafarers, 
With ruining tempest utterly forspent, 
See through wide-parting clouds the radiance 
Of the eternal-wheeling Northern Wain; 
So joyed the Troyfolk as they thronged around, 
And more than all Laomedon's son, for now 
Leapt in his heart a hope, that yet the ships 
Might by those Aethiop men be burned with fire; 
So giantlike their king was, and themselves 
So huge a host, and so athirst for fight. 
Therefore with all observance welcomed he 
The strong son of the Lady of the Dawn 
With goodly gifts and with abundant cheer. 
So at the banquet King and Hero sat 
And talked, this telling of the Danaan chiefs, 
And all the woes himself had suffered, that 
Telling of that strange immortality 
By the Dawn-goddess given to his sire, 
Telling of the unending flow and ebb 
Of the Sea-mother, of the sacred flood 
Of Ocean fathomless-rolling, of the bounds 
Of Earth that wearieth never of her travail, 
Of where the Sun-steeds leap from orient waves, 
Telling withal of all his wayfaring 
From Ocean's verge to Priam's wall, and spurs 
Of Ida. Yea, he told how his strong hands 
Smote the great army of the Solymi 
Who barred his way, whose deed presumptuous brought 
Upon their own heads crushing ruin and woe. 
So told he all that marvellous tale, and told 
Of countless tribes and nations seen of him. 
And Priam heard, and ever glowed his heart 
Within him; and the old lips answering spake: 
"Memnon, the Gods are good, who have vouchsafed 
To me to look upon thine host, and thee 
Here in mine halls. O that their grace would so 
Crown this their boon, that I might see my foes 
All thrust to one destruction by thy spears. 
That well may be, for marvellous-like art thou 
To some invincible Deathless One, yea, more 
Than any earthly hero. Wherefore thou, 
I trust, shalt hurl wild havoc through their host. 
But now, I pray thee, for this day do thou 
Cheer at my feast thine heart, and with the morn 
Shalt thou go forth to battle worthy of thee." 

Then in his hands a chalice deep and wide 
He raised, and Memnon in all love he pledged 
In that huge golden cup, a gift of Gods; 
For this the cunning God-smith brought to Zeus, 
His masterpiece, what time the Mighty in Power 
To Hephaestus gave for bride the Cyprian Queen; 
And Zeus on Dardanus his godlike son 
Bestowed it, he on Erichthonius; 
Erichthonius to Tros the great of heart 
Gave it, and he with all his treasure-store 
Bequeathed it unto Ilus, and he gave 
That wonder to Laomedon, and he 
To Priam, who had thought to leave the same 
To his own son. Fate ordered otherwise. 
And Memnon clasped his hands about that cup 
So peerless-beautiful, and all his heart 
Marvelled; and thus he spake unto the King: 
"Beseems not with great swelling words to vaunt 
Amidst the feast, and lavish promises, 
But rather quietly to eat in hall, 
And to devise deeds worthy. Whether I 
Be brave and strong, or whether I be not, 
Battle, wherein a man's true might is seen, 
Shall prove to thee. Now would I rest, nor drink 
The long night through. The battle-eager spirit 
By measureless wine and lack of sleep is dulled." 

Marvelled at him the old King, and he said: 
"As seems thee good touching the banquet, do 
After thy pleasure. I, when thou art loth, 
Will not constrain thee. Yea, unmeet it is 
To hold back him who fain would leave the board, 
Or hurry from one's halls who fain would stay. 
So is the good old law with all true men." 

Then rose that champion from the board, and passed 
Thence to his sleep -- his last! And with him went 
All others from the banquet to their rest: 
And gentle sleep slid down upon them soon. 

But in the halls of Zeus, the Lightning-lord, 
Feasted the gods the while, and Cronos' son, 
All-father, of his deep foreknowledge spake 
Amidst them of the issue of the strife: 
"Be it known unto you all, to-morn shall bring 
By yonder war affliction swift and sore; 
For many mighty horses shall ye see 
In either host beside their chariots slain, 
And many heroes perishing. Therefore ye 
Remember these my words, howe'er ye grieve 
For dear ones. Let none clasp my knees in prayer, 
Since even to us relentless are the fates." 

So warned he them, which knew before, that all 
Should from the battle stand aside, howe'er 
Heart-wrung; that none, petitioning for a son 
Or dear one, should to Olympus vainly come. 
So, at that warning of the Thunderer, 
The Son of Cronos, all they steeled their hearts 
To bear, and spake no word against their king; 
For in exceeding awe they stood of him. 
Yet to their several mansions and their rest 
With sore hearts went they. O'er their deathless eyes 
The blessing-bringer Sleep his light veils spread. 

When o'er precipitous crests of mountain-walls 
Leapt up broad heaven the bright morning-star 
Who rouseth to their toils from slumber sweet 
The binders of the sheaf, then his last sleep 
Unclasped the warrior-son of her who brings 
Light to the world, the Child of Mists of Night. 
Now swelled his mighty heart with eagerness 
To battle with the foe forthright. And Dawn 
With most reluctant feet began to climb 
Heaven's broad highway. Then did the Trojans gird 
Their battle-harness on; then armed themselves 
The Aethiop men, and all the mingled tribes 
Of those war-helpers that from many lands 
To Priam's aid were gathered. Forth the gates 
Swiftly they rushed, like darkly lowering clouds 
Which Cronos' Son, when storm is rolling up, 
Herdeth together through the welkin wide. 
Swiftly the whole plain filled. Onward they streamed 
Like harvest-ravaging locusts drifting on 
In fashion of heavy-brooding rain-clouds o'er 
Wide plains of earth, an irresistible host 
Bringing wan famine on the sons of men; 
So in their might and multitude they went. 
The city streets were all too strait for them 
Marching: upsoared the dust from underfoot. 

From far the Argives gazed, and marvelling saw 
Their onrush, but with speed arrayed their limbs 
In brass, and in the might of Peleus' son 
Put their glad trust. Amidst them rode he on 
Like to a giant Titan, glorying 
In steeds and chariot, while his armour flashed 
Splendour around in sudden lightning-gleams. 
It was as when the sun from utmost bounds 
Of earth-encompassing ocean comes, and brings 
Light to the world, and flings his splendour wide 
Through heaven, and earth and air laugh all around. 
So glorious, mid the Argives Peleus' son 
Rode onward. Mid the Trojans rode the while 
Memnon the hero, even such to see 
As Ares furious-hearted. Onward swept 
The eager host arrayed about their lord. 

Then in the grapple of war on either side 
Closed the long lines, Trojan and Danaan; 
But chief in prowess still the Aethiops were. 
Crashed they together as when surges meet 
On the wild sea, when, in a day of storm, 
From every quarter winds to battle rush. 
Foe hurled at foe the ashen spear, and slew: 
Screams and death-groans went up like roaring fire. 
As when down-thundering torrents shout and rave 
On-pouring seaward, when the madding rains 
Stream from God's cisterns, when the huddling clouds 
Are hurled against each other ceaselessly, 
And leaps their fiery breath in flashes forth; 
So 'neath the fighters' trampling feet the earth 
Thundered, and leapt the terrible battle-yell 
Through frenzied air, for mad the war-cries were. 

For firstfruits of death's harvest Peleus' son 
Slew Thalius and Mentes nobly born, 
Men of renown, and many a head beside 
Dashed he to dust. As in its furious swoop 
A whirlwind shakes dark chasms underground, 
And earth's foundations crumble and melt away 
Around the deep roots of the shuddering world, 
So the ranks crumbled in swift doom to the dust 
Before the spear and fury of Peleus's son. 

But on the other side the hero child 
Of the Dawn-goddess slew the Argive men, 
Like to a baleful Doom which bringeth down 
On men a grim and ghastly pestilence. 
First slew he Pheron; for the bitter spear 
Plunged through his breast, and down on him he hurled 
Goodly Ereuthus, battle-revellers both, 
Dwellers in Thryus by Alpheus' streams, 
Which followed Nestor to the god-built burg 
Of Ilium. But when he had laid these low, 
Against the son of Neleus pressed he on 
Eager to slay. Godlike Antilochus 
Strode forth to meet him, sped the long spear's flight, 
Yet missed him, for a little he swerved, but slew 
His Aethiop comrade, son of Pyrrhasus. 
Wroth for his fall, against Antilochus 
He leapt, as leaps a lion mad of mood 
Upon a boar, the beast that flincheth not 
From fight with man or brute, whose charge is a flash 
Of lightning; so was his swift leap. His foe 
Antilochus caught a huge stone from the ground, 
Hurled, smote him; but unshaken abode his strength, 
For the strong helm-crest fenced his head from death; 
But rang the morion round his brows. His heart 
Kindled with terrible fury at the blow 
More than before against Antilochus. 
Like seething cauldron boiled his maddened might. 
He stabbed, for all his cunning of fence, the son 
Of Nestor above the breast; the crashing spear 
Plunged to the heart, the spot of speediest death. 

Then upon all the Danaans at his fall 
Came grief; but anguish-stricken was the heart 
Of Nestor most of all, to see his child 
Slain in his sight; for no more bitter pang 
Smiteth the heart of man than when a son 
Perishes, and his father sees him die. 
Therefore, albeit unused to melting mood, 
His soul was torn with agony for the son 
By black death slain. A wild cry hastily 
To Thrasymedes did he send afar: 
"Hither to me, Thrasymedes war-renowned! 
Help me to thrust back from thy brother's corse, 
Yea, from mine hapless son, his murderer, 
That so ourselves may render to our dead 
All dues of mourning. If thou flinch for fear, 
No son of mine art thou, nor of the line 
Of Periclymenus, who dared withstand 
Hercules' self. Come, to the battle-toil! 
For grim necessity oftentimes inspires 
The very coward with courage of despair." 

Then at his cry that brother's heart was stung 
With bitter grief. Swift for his help drew nigh 
Phereus, on whom for his great prince's fall 
Came anguish. Charged these warriors twain to face 
Strong Memnon in the gory strife. As when 
Two hunters 'mid a forest's mountain-folds, 
Eager to take the prey, rush on to meet 
A wild boar or a bear, with hearts afire 
To slay him, but in furious mood he leaps 
On them, and holds at bay the might of men; 
So swelled the heart of Memnon. Nigh drew they, 
Yet vainly essayed to slay him, as they hurled 
The long spears, but the lances glanced aside 
Far from his flesh: the Dawn-queen turned them thence. 
Yet fell their spears not vainly to the ground: 
The lance of fiery-hearted Phereus, winged 
With eager speed, dealt death to Meges' son, 
Polymnius: Laomedon was slain 
By the wrath of Nestor's son for a brother dead, 
The dear one Memnon slew in battle-rout, 
And whom the slayer's war-unwearied hands 
Now stripped of his all-brazen battle-gear, 
Nought recking, he, of Thrasymedes' might, 
Nor of stout Phereus, who were unto him 
But weaklings. A great lion seemed he there 
Standing above a hart, as jackals they, 
That, howso hungry, dare not come too nigh. 

But hard thereby the father gazed thereon 
In agony, and cried the rescue-cry 
To other his war-comrades for their aid 
Against the foe. Himself too burned to fight 
From his war-car; for yearning for the dead 
Goaded him to the fray beyond his strength. 
Ay, and himself had been on his dear son 
Laid, numbered with the dead, had not the voice 
Of Memnon stayed him even in act to rush 
Upon him, for he reverenced in his heart 
The white hairs of an age-mate of his sire: 
"Ancient," he cried, "it were my shame to fight. 
With one so much mine elder: I am not 
Blind unto honour. Verily I weened 
That this was some young warrior, when I saw 
Thee facing thus the foe. My bold heart hoped 
For contest worthy of mine hand and spear. 
Nay, draw thou back afar from battle-toil 
And bitter death. Go, lest, how loth soe'er, 
I smite thee of sore need. Nay, fall not thou 
Beside thy son, against a mightier man 
Fighting, lest men with folly thee should charge, 
For folly it is that braves o'ermastering might." 

He spake, and answered him that warrior old: 
"Nay, Memnon, vain was that last word of thine. 
None would name fool the father who essayed, 
Battling with foes for his son's sake, to thrust 
The ruthless slayer back from that dear corpse, 
But ah that yet my strength were whole in me, 
That thou might'st know my spear! Now canst thou vaunt 
Proudly enow: a young man's heart is bold 
And light his wit. Uplifted is thy soul 
And vain thy speech. If in my strength of youth 
Thou hadst met me -- ha, thy friends had not rejoiced, 
For all thy might! But me the grievous weight 
Of age bows down, like an old lion whom 
A cur may boldly drive back from the fold, 
For that he cannot, in his wrath's despite, 
Maintain his own cause, being toothless now, 
And strengthless, and his strong heart tamed by time. 
So well the springs of olden strength no more 
Now in my breast. Yet am I stronger still 
Than many men; my grey hairs yield to few 
That have within them all the strength of youth." 

So drew he back a little space, and left 
Lying in dust his son, since now no more 
Lived in the once lithe limbs the olden strength, 
For the years' weight lay heavy on his head. 
Back leapt Thrasymedes likewise, spearman good, 
And battle-eager Phereus, and the rest 
Their comrades; for that slaughter-dealing man 
Pressed hard on them. As when from mountains high 
A shouting river with wide-echoing din 
Sweeps down its fathomless whirlpools through the gloom,

When God with tumult of a mighty storm 
Hath palled the sky in cloud from verge to verge, 
When thunders crash all round, when thick and fast 
Gleam lightnings from the huddling clouds, when fields 
Are flooded as the hissing rain descends, 
And all the air is filled with awful roar 
Of torrents pouring down the hill-ravines; 
So Memnon toward the shores of Hellespont 
Before him hurled the Argives, following hard 
Behind them, slaughtering ever. Many a man 
Fell in the dust, and left his life in blood 
'Neath Aethiop hands. Stained was the earth with gore 
As Danaans died. Exulted Memnon's soul 
As on the ranks of foemen ever he rushed, 
And heaped with dead was all the plain of Troy. 
And still from fight refrained he not; he hoped 
To be a light of safety unto Troy 
And bane to Danaans. But all the while 
Stood baleful Doom beside him, and spurred on 
To strife, with flattering smile. To right, to left 
His stalwart helpers wrought in battle-toil, 
Alcyoneus and Nychius, and the son 
Of Asius furious-souled; Meneclus' spear, 
Clydon and Alexippus, yea, a host 
Eager to chase the foe, men who in fight 
Quit them like men, exulting in their king. 
Then, as Meneclus on the Danaans charged, 
The son of Neleus slew him. Wroth for his friend, 
Whole throngs of foes fierce-hearted Memnon slew. 
As when a hunter midst the mountains drives 
Swift deer within the dark lines of his toils -- 
The eager ring of beaters closing in 
Presses the huddled throng into the snares 
Of death: the dogs are wild with joy of the chase 
Ceaselessly giving tongue, the while his darts 
Leap winged with death on brocket and on hind; 
So Memnon slew and ever slew: his men 
Rejoiced, the while in panic stricken rout 
Before that glorious man the Argives fled. 
As when from a steep mountain's precipice-brow 
Leaps a huge crag, which all-resistless Zeus 
By stroke of thunderbolt hath hurled from the crest; 
Crash oakwood copses, echo long ravines, 
Shudders the forest to its rattle and roar, 
And flocks therein and herds and wild things flee 
Scattering, as bounding, whirling, it descends 
With deadly pitiless onrush; so his foes 
Fled from the lightning-flash of Memnon's spear. 

Then to the side of Aeacus' mighty son 
Came Nestor. Anguished for his son he cried: 
"Achilles, thou great bulwark of the Greeks, 
Slain is my child! The armour of my dead 
Hath Memnon, and I fear me lest his corse 
Be cast a prey to dogs. Haste to his help! 
True friend is he who still remembereth 
A friend though slain, and grieves for one no more." 

Achilles heard; his heart was thrilled with grief: 
He glanced across the rolling battle, saw 
Memnon, saw where in throngs the Argives fell 
Beneath his spear. Forthright he turned away 
From where the rifted ranks of Troy fell fast 
Before his hands, and, thirsting for the fight, 
Wroth for Antilochus and the others slain, 
Came face to face with Memnon. In his hands 
That godlike hero caught up from the ground 
A stone, a boundary-mark 'twixt fields of wheat, 
And hurled. Down on the shield of Peleus' son 
It crashed. But he, the invincible, shrank not 
Before the huge rock-shard, but, thrusting out 
His long lance, rushed to close with him, afoot, 
For his steeds stayed behind the battle-rout. 
On the right shoulder above the shield he smote 
And staggered him; but he, despite the wound, 
Fought on with heart unquailing. Swiftly he thrust 
And pricked with his strong spear Achilles' arm. 
Forth gushed the blood: rejoicing with vain joy 
To Aeacus' son with arrogant words he cried: 
"Now shalt thou in thy death fill up, I trow, 
Thy dark doom, overmastered by mine hands. 
Thou shalt not from this fray escape alive! 
Fool, wherefore hast thou ruthlessly destroyed 
Trojans, and vaunted thee the mightiest man 
Of men, a deathless Nereid's son? Ha, now 
Thy doom hath found thee! Of birth divine am I, 
The Dawn-queen's mighty son, nurtured afar 
By lily-slender Hesperid Maids, beside 
The Ocean-river. Therefore not from thee 
Nor from grim battle shrink I, knowing well 
How far my goddess-mother doth transcend 
A Nereid, whose child thou vauntest thee. 
To Gods and men my mother bringeth light; 
On her depends the issue of all things, 
Works great and glorious in Olympus wrought 
Whereof comes blessing unto men. But thine -- 
She sits in barren crypts of brine: she dwells 
Glorying mid dumb sea-monsters and mid fish, 
Deedless, unseen! Nothing I reck of her, 
Nor rank her with the immortal Heavenly Ones." 

In stern rebuke spake Aeacus' aweless son: 
"Memnon, how wast thou so distraught of wit 
That thou shouldst face me, and to fight defy 
Me, who in might, in blood, in stature far 
Surpass thee? From supremest Zeus I trace 
My glorious birth; and from the strong Sea-god 
Nereus, begetter of the Maids of the Sea, 
The Nereids, honoured of the Olympian Gods. 
And chiefest of them all is Thetis, wise 
With wisdom world-renowned; for in her bowers 
She sheltered Dionysus, chased by might 
Of murderous Lycurgus from the earth. 
Yea, and the cunning God-smith welcomed she 
Within her mansion, when from heaven he fell. 
Ay, and the Lightning-lord she once released 
From bonds. The all-seeing Dwellers in the Sky 
Remember all these things, and reverence 
My mother Thetis in divine Olympus. 
Ay, that she is a Goddess shalt thou know 
When to thine heart the brazen spear shall pierce 
Sped by my might. Patroclus' death I avenged 
On Hector, and Antilochus on thee 
Will I avenge. No weakling's friend thou hast slain! 
But why like witless children stand we here 
Babbling our parents' fame and our own deeds? 
Now is the hour when prowess shall decide." 

Then from the sheath he flashed his long keen sword, 
And Memnon his; and swiftly in fiery fight 
Closed they, and rained the never-ceasing blows 
Upon the bucklers which with craft divine 
Hephaestus' self had fashioned. Once and again 
Clashed they together, and their cloudy crests 
Touched, mingling all their tossing storm of hair. 
And Zeus, for that he loved them both, inspired 
With prowess each, and mightier than their wont 
He made them, made them tireless, nothing like 
To men, but Gods: and gloated o'er the twain 
The Queen of Strife. In eager fury these 
Thrust swiftly out the spear, with fell intent 
To reach the throat 'twixt buckler-rim and helm, 
Thrust many a time and oft, and now would aim 
The point beneath the shield, above the greave, 
Now close beneath the corslet curious-wrought 
That lapped the stalwart frame: hard, fast they lunged, 
And on their shoulders clashed the arms divine. 
Roared to the very heavens the battle-shout 
Of warring men, of Trojans, Aethiops, 
And Argives mighty-hearted, while the dust 
Rolled up from 'neath their feet, tossed to the sky 
In stress of battle-travail great and strong. 

As when a mist enshrouds the hills, what time 
Roll up the rain-clouds, and the torrent-beds 
Roar as they fill with rushing floods, and howls 
Each gorge with fearful voices; shepherds quake 
To see the waters' downrush and the mist, 
Screen dear to wolves and all the wild fierce things 
Nursed in the wide arms of the forest; so 
Around the fighters' feet the choking dust 
Hung, hiding the fair splendour of the sun 
And darkening all the heaven. Sore distressed 
With dust and deadly conflict were the folk. 
Then with a sudden hand some Blessed One 
Swept the dust-pall aside; and the Gods saw 
The deadly Fates hurling the charging lines 
Together, in the unending wrestle locked 
Of that grim conflict, saw where never ceased 
Ares from hideous slaughter, saw the earth 
Crimsoned all round with rushing streams of blood, 
Saw where dark Havoc gloated o'er the scene, 
Saw the wide plain with corpses heaped, even all 
Bounded 'twixt Simois and Xanthus, where 
They sweep from Ida down to Hellespont. 

But when long lengthened out the conflict was 
Of those two champions, and the might of both 
In that strong tug and strain was equal-matched, 
Then, gazing from Olympus' far-off heights, 
The Gods joyed, some in the invincible son 
Of Peleus, others in the goodly child 
Of old Tithonus and the Queen of Dawn. 
Thundered the heavens on high from east to west, 
And roared the sea from verge to verge, and rocked 
The dark earth 'neath the heroes' feet, and quaked 
Proud Nereus' daughters all round Thetis thronged 
In grievous fear for mighty Achilles' sake; 
And trembled for her son the Child of the Mist 
As in her chariot through the sky she rode. 
Marvelled the Daughters of the Sun, who stood 
Near her, around that wondrous splendour-ring 
Traced for the race-course of the tireless sun 
By Zeus, the limit of all Nature's life 
And death, the dally round that maketh up 
The eternal circuit of the rolling years. 
And now amongst the Blessed bitter feud 
Had broken out; but by behest of Zeus 
The twin Fates suddenly stood beside these twain, 
One dark -- her shadow fell on Memnon's heart; 
One bright -- her radiance haloed Peleus' son. 
And with a great cry the Immortals saw, 
And filled with sorrow they of the one part were, 
They of the other with triumphant joy. 

Still in the midst of blood-stained battle-rout 
Those heroes fought, unknowing of the Fates 
Now drawn so nigh, but each at other hurled 
His whole heart's courage, all his bodily might. 
Thou hadst said that in the strife of that dread day 
Huge tireless Giants or strong Titans warred, 
So fiercely blazed the wildfire of their strife, 
Now, when they clashed with swords, now when they leapt 
Hurling huge stones. Nor either would give back 
Before the hail of blows, nor quailed. They stood 
Like storm-tormented headlands steadfast, clothed 
With might past words, unearthly; for the twain 
Alike could boast their lineage of high Zeus. 
Therefore 'twixt these Enyo lengthened out 
The even-balanced strife, while ever they 
In that grim wrestle strained their uttermost, 
They and their dauntless comrades, round their kings 
With ceaseless fury toiling, till their spears 
Stood shivered all in shields of warriors slain, 
And of the fighters woundless none remained; 
But from all limbs streamed down into the dust 
The blood and sweat of that unresting strain 
Of fight, and earth was hidden with the dead, 
As heaven is hidden with clouds when meets the sun 
The Goat-star, and the shipman dreads the deep. 
As charged the lines, the snorting chariot-steeds 
Trampled the dead, as on the myriad leaves 
Ye trample in the woods at entering-in 
Of winter, when the autumn-tide is past. 

Still mid the corpses and the blood fought on 
Those glorious sons of Gods, nor ever ceased 
From wrath of fight. But Eris now inclined 
The fatal scales of battle, which no more 
Were equal-poised. Beneath the breast-bone then 
Of godlike Memnon plunged Achilles' sword; 
Clear through his body all the dark-blue blade 
Leapt: suddenly snapped the silver cord of life. 
Down in a pool of blood he fell, and clashed 
His massy armour, and earth rang again. 
Then turned to flight his comrades panic-struck, 
And of his arms the Myrmidons stripped the dead, 
While fled the Trojans, and Achilles chased, 
As whirlwind swift and mighty to destroy. 

Then groaned the Dawn, and palled herself in clouds, 
And earth was darkened. At their mother's hest 
All the light Breathings of the Dawn took hands, 
And slid down one 1ong stream of sighing wind 
To Priam's plain, and floated round the dead, 
And softly, swiftly caught they up, and bare 
Through silver mists the Dawn-queen's son, with hearts 
Sore aching for their brother's fall, while moaned 
Around them all the air. As on they passed, 
Fell many blood-gouts from those pierced limbs 
Down to the earth, and these were made a sign 
To generations yet to be. The Gods 
Gathered them up from many lands, and made 
Thereof a far-resounding river, named 
Of all that dwell beneath long Ida's flanks 
Paphlagoneion. As its waters flow 
'Twixt fertile acres, once a year they turn 
To blood, when comes the woeful day whereon 
Died Memnon. Thence a sick and choking reek 
Steams: thou wouldst say that from a wound unhealed 
Corrupting humours breathed an evil stench. 
Ay, so the Gods ordained: but now flew on 
Bearing Dawn's mighty son the rushing winds 
Skimming earth's face and palled about with night. 

Nor were his Aethiopian comrades left 
To wander of their King forlorn: a God 
Suddenly winged those eager souls with speed 
Such as should soon be theirs for ever, changed 
To flying fowl, the children of the air. 
Wailing their King in the winds' track they sped. 
As when a hunter mid the forest-brakes 
Is by a boar or grim-jawed lion slain, 
And now his sorrowing friends take up the corse, 
And bear it heavy-hearted; and the hounds 
Follow low-whimpering, pining for their lord 
In that disastrous hunting lost; so they 
Left far behind that stricken field of blood, 
And fast they followed after those swift winds 

With multitudinous moaning, veiled in mist 
Unearthly. Trojans over all the plain 
And Danaans marvelled, seeing that great host 
Vanishing with their King. All hearts stood still 
In dumb amazement. But the tireless winds 
Sighing set hero Memnon's giant corpse 
Down by the deep flow of Aesopus' stream, 
Where is a fair grove of the bright-haired Nymphs, 
The which round his long barrow afterward 
Aesopus' daughters planted, screening it 
With many and manifold trees: and long and loud 
Wailed those Immortals, chanting his renown, 
The son of the Dawn-goddess splendour-throned. 

Now sank the sun: the Lady of the Morn 
Wailing her dear child from the heavens came down. 
Twelve maidens shining-tressed attended her, 
The warders of the high paths of the sun 
For ever circling, warders of the night 
And dawn, and each world-ordinance framed of Zeus, 
Around whose mansion's everlasting doors 
From east to west they dance, from west to east, 
Whirling the wheels of harvest-laden years, 
While rolls the endless round of winter's cold, 
And flowery spring, and lovely summer-tide, 
And heavy-clustered autumn. These came down 
From heaven, for Memnon wailing wild and high; 
And mourned with these the Pleiads. Echoed round 
Far-stretching mountains, and Aesopus' stream. 
Ceaseless uprose the keen, and in their midst, 
Fallen on her son and clasping, wailed the Dawn; 
"Dead art thou, dear, dear child, and thou hast clad 
Thy mother with a pall of grief. Oh, I, 
Now thou art slain, will not endure to light 
The Immortal Heavenly Ones! No, I will plunge 
Down to the dread depths of the underworld, 
Where thy lone spirit flitteth to and fro, 
And will to blind night leave earth, sky, and sea, 
Till Chaos and formless darkness brood o'er all, 
That Cronos' Son may also learn what means 
Anguish of heart. For not less worship-worthy 
Than Nereus' Child, by Zeus's ordinance, 
Am I, who look on all things, I, who bring 
All to their consummation. Recklessly 
My light Zeus now despiseth! Therefore I 
Will pass into the darkness. Let him bring 
Up to Olympus Thetis from the sea 
To hold for him light forth to Gods and men! 
My sad soul loveth darkness more than day, 
Lest I pour light upon thy slayer's head" 

Thus as she cried, the tears ran down her face 
Immortal, like a river brimming aye: 
Drenched was the dark earth round the corse. The Night 
Grieved in her daughter's anguish, and the heaven 
Drew over all his stars a veil of mist 
And cloud, of love unto the Lady of Light. 

Meanwhile within their walls the Trojan folk 
For Memnon sorrowed sore, with vain regret 
Yearning for that lost king and all his host. 
Nor greatly joyed the Argives, where they lay 
Camped in the open plain amidst the dead. 
There, mingled with Achilles' praise, uprose 
Wails for Antilochus: joy clasped hands with grief. 

All night in groans and sighs most pitiful 
The Dawn-queen lay: a sea of darkness moaned 
Around her. Of the dayspring nought she recked: 
She loathed Olympus' spaces. At her side 
Fretted and whinnied still her fleetfoot steeds, 
Trampling the strange earth, gazing at their Queen 
Grief-stricken, yearning for the fiery course. 
Suddenly crashed the thunder of the wrath 
Of Zeus; rocked round her all the shuddering earth, 
And on immortal Eos trembling came. 

Swiftly the dark-skinned Aethiops from her sight 
Buried their lord lamenting. As they wailed 
Unceasingly, the Dawn-queen lovely-eyed 
Changed them to birds sweeping through air around 
The barrow of the mighty dead. And these 
Still do the tribes of men "The Memnons" call; 
And still with wailing cries they dart and wheel 
Above their king's tomb, and they scatter dust 
Down on his grave, still shrill the battle-cry, 
In memory of Memnon, each to each. 
But he in Hades' mansions, or perchance 
Amid the Blessed on the Elysian Plain, 
Laugheth. Divine Dawn comforteth her heart 
Beholding them: but theirs is toil of strife 
Unending, till the weary victors strike 
The vanquished dead, or one and all fill up 
The measure of their doom around his grave. 

So by command of Eos, Lady of Light, 
The swift birds dree their weird. But Dawn divine 
Now heavenward soared with the all-fostering Hours, 
Who drew her to Zeus' threshold, sorely loth, 
Yet conquered by their gentle pleadings, such 
As salve the bitterest grief of broken hearts. 
Nor the Dawn-queen forgat her daily course, 
But quailed before the unbending threat of Zeus, 
Of whom are all things, even all comprised 
Within the encircling sweep of Ocean's stream, 
Earth and the palace-dome of burning stars. 
Before her went her Pleiad-harbingers, 
Then she herself flung wide the ethereal gates, 
And, scattering spray of splendour, flashed there-through.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK III

How By the Shaft of a God Laid Low Was Hero Achilles 

When shone the light of Dawn the splendour-throned, 
Then to the ships the Pylian spearmen bore 
Antilochus' corpse, sore sighing for their prince, 
And by the Hellespont they buried him 
With aching hearts. Around him groaning stood 
The battle-eager sons of Argives, all, 
Of love for Nestor, shrouded o'er with grief. 
But that grey hero's heart was nowise crushed 
By sorrow; for the wise man's soul endures 
Bravely, and cowers not under affliction's stroke. 
But Peleus' son, wroth for Antilochus 
His dear friend, armed for vengeance terrible 
Upon the Trojans. Yea, and these withal, 
Despite their dread of mighty Achilles' spear, 
Poured battle-eager forth their gates, for now 
The Fates with courage filled their breasts, of whom 
Many were doomed to Hades to descend, 
Whence there is no return, thrust down by hands 
Of Aeacus' son, who also was foredoomed 
To perish that same day by Priam's wall. 
Swift met the fronts of conflict: all the tribes 
Of Troy's host, and the battle-biding Greeks, 
Afire with that new-kindled fury of war. 

Then through the foe the son of Peleus made 
Wide havoc: all around the earth was drenched 
With gore, and choked with corpses were the streams 
Of Simois and Xanthus. Still he chased, 
Still slaughtered, even to the city's walls; 
For panic fell on all the host. And now 
All had he slain, had dashed the gates to earth, 
Rending them from their hinges, or the bolts, 
Hurling himself against them, had he snapped, 
And for the Danaans into Priam's burg 
Had made a way, had utterly destroyed 
That goodly town -- but now was Phoebus wroth 
Against him with grim fury, when he saw 
Those countless troops of heroes slain of him. 
Down from Olympus with a lion-leap 
He came: his quiver on his shoulders lay, 
And shafts that deal the wounds incurable. 
Facing Achilles stood he; round him clashed 
Quiver and arrows; blazed with quenchless flame 
His eyes, and shook the earth beneath his feet. 
Then with a terrible shout the great God cried, 
So to turn back from war Achilles awed 
By the voice divine, and save from death the Trojans: 
"Back from the Trojans, Peleus' son! Beseems not 
That longer thou deal death unto thy foes, 
Lest an Olympian God abase thy pride." 

But nothing quailed the hero at the voice 
Immortal, for that round him even now 
Hovered the unrelenting Fates. He recked 
Naught of the God, and shouted his defiance. 
"Phoebus, why dost thou in mine own despite 
Stir me to fight with Gods, and wouldst protect 
The arrogant Trojans? Heretofore hast thou 
By thy beguiling turned me from the fray, 
When from destruction thou at the first didst save 
Hector, whereat the Trojans all through Troy 
Exulted. Nay, thou get thee back: return 
Unto the mansion of the Blessed, lest 
I smite thee -- ay, immortal though thou be!" 

Then on the God he turned his back, and sped 
After the Trojans fleeing cityward, 
And harried still their flight; but wroth at heart 
Thus Phoebus spake to his indignant soul: 
"Out on this man! he is sense-bereft! But now 
Not Zeus himself nor any other Power 
Shall save this madman who defies the Gods!" 

From mortal sight he vanished into cloud, 
And cloaked with mist a baleful shaft he shot 
Which leapt to Achilles' ankle: sudden pangs 
With mortal sickness made his whole heart faint. 
He reeled, and like a tower he fell, that falls 
Smit by a whirlwind when an earthquake cleaves 
A chasm for rushing blasts from underground; 
So fell the goodly form of Aeacus' son. 
He glared, a murderous glance, to right, to left, 
[Upon the Trojans, and a terrible threat] 
Shouted, a threat that could not be fulfilled: 
"Who shot at me a stealthy-smiting shaft? 
Let him but dare to meet me face to face! 
So shall his blood and all his bowels gush out 
About my spear, and he be hellward sped! 
I know that none can meet me man to man 
And quell in fight -- of earth-born heroes none, 
Though such an one should bear within his breast 
A heart unquailing, and have thews of brass. 
But dastards still in stealthy ambush lurk 
For lives of heroes. Let him face me then! -- 
Ay! though he be a God whose anger burns 
Against the Danaans! Yea, mine heart forebodes 
That this my smiter was Apollo, cloaked 
In deadly darkness. So in days gone by 
My mother told me how that by his shafts 
I was to die before the Scaean Gates 
A piteous death. Her words were not vain words." 

Then with unflinching hands from out the wound 
Incurable he drew the deadly shaft 
In agonized pain. Forth gushed the blood; his heart 
Waxed faint beneath the shadow of coming doom. 
Then in indignant wrath he hurled from him 
The arrow: a sudden gust of wind swept by, 
And caught it up, and, even as he trod 
Zeus' threshold, to Apollo gave it back; 
For it beseemed not that a shaft divine, 
Sped forth by an Immortal, should be lost. 
He unto high Olympus swiftly came, 
To the great gathering of immortal Gods, 
Where all assembled watched the war of men, 
These longing for the Trojans' triumph, those 
For Danaan victory; so with diverse wills 
Watched they the strife, the slayers and the slain. 

Him did the Bride of Zeus behold, and straight 
Upbraided with exceeding bitter words: 
"What deed of outrage, Phoebus, hast thou done 
This day, forgetful of that day whereon 
To godlike Peleus' spousals gathered all 
The Immortals? Yea, amidst the feasters thou 
Sangest how Thetis silver-footed left 
The sea's abysses to be Peleus' bride; 
And as thou harpedst all earth's children came 
To hearken, beasts and birds, high craggy hills, 
Rivers, and all deep-shadowed forests came. 
All this hast thou forgotten, and hast wrought 
A ruthless deed, hast slain a godlike man, 
Albeit thou with other Gods didst pour 
The nectar, praying that he might be the son 
By Thetis given to Peleus. But that prayer 
Hast thou forgotten, favouring the folk 
Of tyrannous Laomedon, whose kine 
Thou keptest. He, a mortal, did despite 
To thee, the deathless! O, thou art wit-bereft! 
Thou favourest Troy, thy sufferings all forgot. 
Thou wretch, and doth thy false heart know not this, 
What man is an offence, and meriteth 
Suffering, and who is honoured of the Gods? 
Ever Achilles showed us reverence -- yea, 
Was of our race. Ha, but the punishment 
Of Troy, I ween, shall not be lighter, though 
Aeacus' son have fallen; for his son 
Right soon shall come from Scyros to the war 
To help the Argive men, no less in might 
Than was his sire, a bane to many a foe. 
But thou -- thou for the Trojans dost not care, 
But for his valour enviedst Peleus' son, 
Seeing he was the mightest of all men. 
Thou fool! how wilt thou meet the Nereid's eyes, 
When she shall stand in Zeus' hall midst the Gods, 
Who praised thee once, and loved as her own son?" 

So Hera spake, in bitterness of soul 
Upbraiding, but he answered her not a word, 
Of reverence for his mighty Father's bride; 
Nor could he lift his eyes to meet her eyes, 
But sat abashed, aloof from all the Gods 
Eternal, while in unforgiving wrath 
Scowled on him all the Immortals who maintained 
The Danaans' cause; but such as fain would bring 
Triumph to Troy, these with exultant hearts 
Extolled him, hiding it from Hera's eyes, 
Before whose wrath all Heaven-abiders shrank. 

But Peleus' son the while forgat not yet 
War's fury: still in his invincible limbs 
The hot blood throbbed, and still he longed for fight. 
Was none of all the Trojans dared draw nigh 
The stricken hero, but at distance stood, 
As round a wounded lion hunters stand 
Mid forest-brakes afraid, and, though the shaft 
Stands in his heart, yet faileth not in him 
His royal courage, but with terrible glare 
Roll his fierce eyes, and roar his grimly jaws; 
So wrath and anguish of his deadly hurt 
To fury stung Peleides' soul; but aye 
His strength ebbed through the god-envenomed wound. 
Yet leapt he up, and rushed upon the foe, 
And flashed the lightning of his lance; it slew 
The goodly Orythaon, comrade stout 
Of Hector, through his temples crashing clear: 
His helm stayed not the long lance fury-sped 
Which leapt therethrough, and won within the bones 
The heart of the brain, and spilt his lusty life. 
Then stabbed he 'neath the brow Hipponous 
Even to the eye-roots, that the eyeball fell 
To earth: his soul to Hades flitted forth. 
Then through the jaw he pierced Alcathous, 
And shore away his tongue: in dust he fell 
Gasping his life out, and the spear-head shot 
Out through his ear. These, as they rushed on him, 
That hero slew; but many a fleer's life 
He spilt, for in his heart still leapt the blood. 

But when his limbs grew chill, and ebbed away 
His spirit, leaning on his spear he stood, 
While still the Trojans fled in huddled rout 
Of panic, and he shouted unto them: 
"Trojan and Dardan cravens, ye shall not 
Even in my death, escape my merciless spear, 
But unto mine Avenging Spirits ye 
Shall pay -- ay, one and all -- destruction's debt!" 

He spake; they heard and quailed: as mid the hills 
Fawns tremble at a lion's deep-mouthed roar, 
And terror-stricken flee the monster, so 
The ranks of Trojan chariot-lords, the lines 
Of battle-helpers drawn from alien lands, 
Quailed at the last shout of Achilles, deemed 
That he was woundless yet. But 'neath the weight 
Of doom his aweless heart, his mighty limbs, 
At last were overborne. Down midst the dead 
He fell, as fails a beetling mountain-cliff. 
Earth rang beneath him: clanged with a thundercrash 
His arms, as Peleus' son the princely fell. 
And still his foes with most exceeding dread 
Stared at him, even as, when some murderous beast 
Lies slain by shepherds, tremble still the sheep 
Eyeing him, as beside the fold he lies, 
And shrinking, as they pass him, far aloof 
And, even as he were living, fear him dead; 
So feared they him, Achilles now no more. 

Yet Paris strove to kindle those faint hearts; 
For his own heart exulted, and he hoped, 
Now Peleus' son, the Danaans' strength, had fallen, 
Wholly to quench the Argive battle-fire: 
"Friends, if ye help me truly and loyally, 
Let us this day die, slain by Argive men, 
Or live, and hale to Troy with Hector's steeds 
In triumph Peleus' son thus fallen dead, 
The steeds that, grieving, yearning for their lord 
To fight have borne me since my brother died. 
Might we with these but hale Achilles slain, 
Glory were this for Hector's horses, yea, 
For Hector -- if in Hades men have sense 
Of righteous retribution. This man aye 
Devised but mischief for the sons of Troy; 
And now Troy's daughters with exultant hearts 
From all the city streets shall gather round, 
As pantheresses wroth for stolen cubs, 
Or lionesses, might stand around a man 
Whose craft in hunting vexed them while he lived. 
So round Achilles -- a dead corpse at last! -- 
In hurrying throngs Troy's daughters then shall come 
In unforgiving, unforgetting hate, 
For parents wroth, for husbands slain, for sons, 
For noble kinsmen. Most of all shall joy 
My father, and the ancient men, whose feet 
Unwillingly are chained within the walls 
By eld, if we shall hale him through our gates, 
And give our foe to fowls of the air for meat." 

Then they, which feared him theretofore, in haste 
Closed round the corpse of strong-heart Aeacus' son, 
Glaucus, Aeneas, battle-fain Agenor, 
And other cunning men in deadly fight, 
Eager to hale him thence to Ilium 
The god-built burg. But Aias failed him not. 
Swiftly that godlike man bestrode the dead: 
Back from the corpse his long lance thrust them all. 
Yet ceased they not from onslaught; thronging round, 
Still with swift rushes fought they for the prize, 
One following other, like to long-lipped bees 
Which hover round their hive in swarms on swarms 
To drive a man thence; but he, recking naught 
Of all their fury, carveth out the combs 
Of nectarous honey: harassed sore are they 
By smoke-reek and the robber; spite of all 
Ever they dart against him; naught cares he; 
So naught of all their onsets Aias recked; 
But first he stabbed Agelaus in the breast, 
And slew that son of Maion: Thestor next: 
Ocythous he smote, Agestratus, 
Aganippus, Zorus, Nessus, Erymas 
The war-renowned, who came from Lycia-land 
With mighty-hearted Glaucus, from his home 
In Melanippion on the mountain-ridge, 
Athena's fane, which Massikyton fronts 
Anigh Chelidonia's headland, dreaded sore 
Of scared seafarers, when its lowering crags 
Must needs be doubled. For his death the blood 
Of famed Hippolochus' son was horror-chilled; 
For this was his dear friend. With one swift thrust 
He pierced the sevenfold hides of Aias' shield, 
Yet touched his flesh not; stayed the spear-head was 
By those thick hides and by the corset-plate 
Which lapped his battle-tireless limbs. But still 
From that stern conflict Glaucus drew not back, 
Burning to vanquish Aias, Aeacus' son, 
And in his folly vaunting threatened him: 
"Aias, men name thee mightiest man of all 
The Argives, hold thee in passing-high esteem 
Even as Achilles: therefore thou, I wot, 
By that dead warrior dead this day shalt lie!" 

So hurled he forth a vain word, knowing not 
How far in might above him was the man 
Whom his spear threatened. Battle-bider Aias 
Darkly and scornfully glaring on him, said 
"Thou craven wretch, and knowest thou not this, 
How much was Hector mightier than thou 
In war-craft? yet before my might, my spear, 
He shrank. Ay, with his valour was there blent 
Discretion. Thou thy thoughts are deathward set, 
Who dar'st defy me to the battle, me, 
A mightier far than thou! Thou canst not say 
That friendship of our fathers thee shall screen; 
Nor me thy gifts shall wile to let thee pass 
Scatheless from war, as once did Tydeus' son. 
Though thou didst 'scape his fury, will not I 
Suffer thee to return alive from war. 
Ha, in thy many helpers dost thou trust 
Who with thee, like so many worthless flies, 
Flit round the noble Achilles' corpse? To these 
Death and black doom shall my swift onset deal." 

Then on the Trojans this way and that he turned, 
As mid long forest-glens a lion turns 
On hounds, and Trojans many and Lycians slew 
That came for honour hungry, till he stood 
Mid a wide ring of flinchers; like a shoal 
Of darting fish when sails into their midst 
Dolphin or shark, a huge sea-fosterling; 
So shrank they from the might of Telamon's son, 
As aye he charged amidst the rout. But still 
Swarmed fighters up, till round Achilles' corse 
To right, to left, lay in the dust the slain 
Countless, as boars around a lion at bay; 
And evermore the strife waxed deadlier. 
Then too Hippolochus' war-wise son was slain 
By Aias of the heart of fire. He fell 
Backward upon Achilles, even as falls 
A sapling on a sturdy mountain-oak; 
So quelled by the spear on Peleus' son he fell. 
But for his rescue Anchises' stalwart son 
Strove hard, with all his comrades battle-fain, 
And haled the corse forth, and to sorrowing friends 
Gave it, to bear to Ilium's hallowed burg. 
Himself to spoil Achilles still fought on, 
Till warrior Aias pierced him with the spear 
Through the right forearm. Swiftly leapt he back 
From murderous war, and hasted thence to Troy. 
There for his healing cunning leeches wrought, 
Who stanched the blood-rush, and laid on the gash 
Balms, such as salve war-stricken warriors' pangs. 

But Aias still fought on: here, there he slew 
With thrusts like lightning-flashes. His great heart 
Ached sorely for his mighty cousin slain. 
And now the warrior-king Laertes' son 
Fought at his side: before him blenched the foe, 
As he smote down Peisander's fleetfoot son, 
The warrior Maenalus, who left his home 
In far-renowned Abydos: down on him 
He hurled Atymnius, the goodly son 
Whom Pegasis the bright-haired Nymph had borne 
To strong Emathion by Granicus' stream. 
Dead by his side he laid Orestius' son, 
Proteus, who dwelt 'neath lofty Ida's folds. 
Ah, never did his mother welcome home 
That son from war, Panaceia beauty-famed! 
He fell by Odysseus' hands, who spilt the lives 
Of many more whom his death-hungering spear 
Reached in that fight around the mighty dead. 
Yet Alcon, son of Megacles battle-swift, 
Hard by Odysseus' right knee drave the spear 
Home, and about the glittering greave the blood 
Dark-crimsom welled. He recked not of the wound, 
But was unto his smiter sudden death; 
For clear through his shield he stabbed him with his spear

Amidst his battle-fury: to the earth 
Backward he dashed him by his giant might 
And strength of hand: clashed round him in the dust 
His armour, and his corslet was distained 
With crimson life-blood. Forth from flesh and shield 
The hero plucked the spear of death: the soul 
Followed the lance-head from the body forth, 
And life forsook its mortal mansion. Then 
Rushed on his comrades, in his wound's despite, 
Odysseus, nor from that stern battle-toil 
Refrained him. And by this a mingled host 
Of Danaans eager-hearted fought around 
The mighty dead, and many and many a foe 
Slew they with those smooth-shafted ashen spears. 
Even as the winds strew down upon the ground 
The flying leaves, when through the forest-glades 
Sweep the wild gusts, as waneth autumn-tide, 
And the old year is dying; so the spears 
Of dauntless Danaans strewed the earth with slain, 
For loyal to dead Achilles were they all, 
And loyal to hero Aias to the death. 
For like black Doom he blasted the ranks of Troy. 
Then against Aias Paris strained his bow; 
But he was ware thereof, and sped a stone 
Swift to the archer's head: that bolt of death 
Crashed through his crested helm, and darkness closed 
Round him. In dust down fell he: naught availed 
His shafts their eager lord, this way and that 
Scattered in dust: empty his quiver lay, 
Flew from his hand the bow. In haste his friends 
Upcaught him from the earth, and Hector's steeds 
Hurried him thence to Troy, scarce drawing breath, 
And moaning in his pain. Nor left his men 
The weapons of their lord, but gathered up 
All from the plain, and bare them to the prince; 
While Aias after him sent a wrathful shout: 
"Dog, thou hast 'scaped the heavy hand of death 
To-day! But swiftly thy last hour shall come 
By some strong Argive's hands, or by mine own, 
But now have I a nobler task in hand, 
From murder's grip to rescue Achilles' corse." 
Then turned he on the foe, hurling swift doom 
On such as fought around Peleides yet. 
'These saw how many yielded up the ghost 
Neath his strong hands, and, with hearts failing them 
For fear, against him could they stand no more. 
As rascal vultures were they, which the swoop 
Of an eagle, king of birds, scares far away 
From carcasses of sheep that wolves have torn; 
So this way, that way scattered they before 
The hurtling stones, the sword, the might of Aias. 
In utter panic from the war they fled, 
In huddled rout, like starlings from the swoop 
Of a death-dealing hawk, when, fleeing bane, 
One drives against another, as they dart 
All terror-huddled in tumultuous flight. 
So from the war to Priam's burg they fled 
Wretchedly clad with terror as a cloak, 
Quailing from mighty Aias' battle-shout, 
As with hands dripping blood-gouts he pursued. 
Yea, all, one after other, had he slain, 
Had they not streamed through city-gates flung wide 
Hard-panting, pierced to the very heart with fear. 
Pent therewithin he left them, as a shepherd 
Leaves folded sheep, and strode back o'er the plain; 
Yet never touched he with his feet the ground, 
But aye he trod on dead men, arms, and blood; 
For countless corpses lay o'er that wide stretch 
Even from broad-wayed Troy to Hellespont, 
Bodies of strong men slain, the spoil of Doom. 
As when the dense stalks of sun-ripened corn 
Fall 'neath the reapers' hands, and the long swaths, 
Heavy with full ears, overspread the field, 
And joys the heart of him who oversees 
The toil, lord of the harvest; even so, 
By baleful havoc overmastered, lay 
All round face-downward men remembering not 
The death-denouncing war-shout. But the sons 
Of fair Achaea left their slaughtered foes 
In dust and blood unstripped of arms awhile 
Till they should lay upon the pyre the son 
Of Peleus, who in battle-shock had been 
Their banner of victory, charging in his might. 
So the kings drew him from that stricken field 
Straining beneath the weight of giant limbs, 
And with all loving care they bore him on, 
And laid him in his tent before the ships. 
And round him gathered that great host, and wailed 
Heart-anguished him who had been the Achaeans' strength,

And now, forgotten all the splendour of spears, 
Lay mid the tents by moaning Hellespont, 
In stature more than human, even as lay 
Tityos, who sought to force Queen Leto, when 
She fared to Pytho: swiftly in his wrath 
Apollo shot, and laid him low, who seemed 
Invincible: in a foul lake of gore 
There lay he, covering many a rood of ground, 
On the broad earth, his mother; and she moaned 
Over her son, of blessed Gods abhorred; 
But Lady Leto laughed. So grand of mould 
There in the foemen's land lay Aeacus' son, 
For joy to Trojans, but for endless grief 
To Achaean men lamenting. Moaned the air 
With sighing from the abysses of the sea; 
And passing heavy grew the hearts of all, 
Thinking: "Now shall we perish by the hands 
Of Trojans!" Then by those dark ships they thought 
Of white-haired fathers left in halls afar, 
Of wives new-wedded, who by couches cold 
Mourned, waiting, waiting, with their tender babes 
For husbands unreturning; and they groaned 
In bitterness of soul. A passion of grief 
Came o'er their hearts; they fell upon their faces 
On the deep sand flung down, and wept as men 
All comfortless round Peleus' mighty son, 
And clutched and plucked out by the roots their hair, 
And east upon their heads defiling sand. 
Their cry was like the cry that goeth up 
From folk that after battle by their walls 
Are slaughtered, when their maddened foes set fire 
To a great city, and slay in heaps on heaps 
Her people, and make spoil of all her wealth; 
So wild and high they wailed beside the sea, 
Because the Danaans' champion, Aeacus' son, 
Lay, grand in death, by a God's arrow slain, 
As Ares lay, when She of the Mighty Father 
With that huge stone down dashed him on Troy's plain. 

Ceaselessly wailed the Myrmidons Achilles, 
A ring of mourners round the kingly dead, 
That kind heart, friend alike to each and all, 
To no man arrogant nor hard of mood, 
But ever tempering strength with courtesy. 

Then Aias first, deep-groaning, uttered forth 
His yearning o'er his father's brother's son 
God-stricken -- ay, no man had smitten him 
Of all upon the wide-wayed earth that dwell! 
Him glorious Aias heavy-hearted mourned, 
Now wandering to the tent of Peleus' son, 
Now cast down all his length, a giant form, 
On the sea-sands; and thus lamented he: 
"Achilles, shield and sword of Argive men, 
Thou hast died in Troy, from Phthia's plains afar, 
Smitten unwares by that accursed shaft, 
Such thing as weakling dastards aim in fight! 
For none who trusts in wielding the great shield, 
None who for war can skill to set the helm 
Upon his brows, and sway the spear in grip, 
And cleave the brass about the breasts of foes, 
Warreth with arrows, shrinking from the fray. 
Not man to man he met thee, whoso smote; 
Else woundless never had he 'scaped thy lance! 
But haply Zeus purposed to ruin all, 
And maketh all our toil and travail vain -- 
Ay, now will grant the Trojans victory 
Who from Achaea now hath reft her shield! 
Ah me! how shall old Peleus in his halls 
Take up the burden of a mighty grief 
Now in his joyless age! His heart shall break 
At the mere rumour of it. Better so, 
Thus in a moment to forget all pain. 
But if these evil tidings slay him not, 
Ah, laden with sore sorrow eld shall come 
Upon him, eating out his heart with grief 
By a lone hearth Peleus so passing dear 
Once to the Blessed! But the Gods vouchsafe 
No perfect happiness to hapless men." 

So he in grief lamented Peleus' son. 
Then ancient Phoenix made heart-stricken moan, 
Clasping the noble form of Aeacus' seed, 
And in wild anguish wailed the wise of heart: 
"Thou art reft from me, dear child, and cureless pain 
Hast left to me! Oh that upon my face 
The veiling earth had fallen, ere I saw 
Thy bitter doom! No pang more terrible 
Hath ever stabbed mine heart no, not that hour 
Of exile, when I fled from fatherland 
And noble parents, fleeing Hellas through, 
Till Peleus welcomed me with gifts, and lord 
Of his Dolopians made me. In his arms 
Thee through his halls one day he bare, and set 
Upon my knees, and bade me foster thee, 
His babe, with all love, as mine own dear child: 
I hearkened to him: blithely didst thou cling 
About mine heart, and, babbling wordless speech, 
Didst call me `father' oft, and didst bedew 
My breast and tunic with thy baby lips. 
Ofttimes with soul that laughed for glee I held 
Thee in mine arms; for mine heart whispered me 
`This fosterling through life shall care for thee, 
Staff of thine age shall be.' And that mine hope 
Was for a little while fulfilled; but now 
Thou hast vanished into darkness, and to me 
Is left long heart-ache wild with all regret. 
Ah, might my sorrow slay me, ere the tale 
To noble Peleus come! When on his ears 
Falleth the heavy tidings, he shall weep 
And wail without surcease. Most piteous grief 
We twain for thy sake shall inherit aye, 
Thy sire and I, who, ere our day of doom, 
Mourning shall go down to the grave for thee -- 
Ay, better this than life unholpen of thee!" 

So moaned his ever-swelling tide of grief. 
And Atreus' son beside him mourned and wept 
With heart on fire with inly smouldering pain: 
"Thou hast perished, chiefest of the Danaan men, 
Hast perished, and hast left the Achaean host 
Fenceless! Now thou art fallen, are they left 
An easier prey to foes. Thou hast given joy 
To Trojans by thy fall, who dreaded thee 
As sheep a lion. These with eager hearts 
Even to the ships will bring the battle now. 
Zeus, Father, thou too with deceitful words 
Beguilest mortals! Thou didst promise me 
That Priam's burg should be destroyed; but now 
That promise given dost thou not fulfil, 
But thou didst cheat mine heart: I shall not win 
The war's goal, now Achilles is no more." 

So did he cry heart-anguished. Mourned all round 
Wails multitudinous for Peleus' son: 
The dark ships echoed back the voice of grief, 
And sighed and sobbed the immeasurable air. 
And as when long sea-rollers, onward driven 
By a great wind, heave up far out at sea, 
And strandward sweep with terrible rush, and aye 
Headland and beach with shattered spray are scourged, 
And roar unceasing; so a dread sound rose 
Of moaning of the Danaans round the corse, 
Ceaselessly wailing Peleus' aweless son. 

And on their mourning soon black night had come, 
But spake unto Atreides Neleus' son, 
Nestor, whose own heart bare its load of grief 
Remembering his own son Antilochus: 
"O mighty Agamemnon, sceptre-lord 
Of Argives, from wide-shrilling lamentation 
Refrain we for this day. None shall withhold 
Hereafter these from all their heart's desire 
Of weeping and lamenting many days. 
But now go to, from aweless Aeacus' son 
Wash we the foul blood-gouts, and lay we him 
Upon a couch: unseemly it is to shame 
The dead by leaving them untended long." 

So counselled Neleus' son, the passing-wise. 
Then hasted he his men, and bade them set 
Caldrons of cold spring-water o'er the flames, 
And wash the corse, and clothe in vesture fair, 
Sea-purple, which his mother gave her son 
At his first sailing against Troy. With speed 
They did their lord's command: with loving care, 
All service meetly rendered, on a couch 
Laid they the mighty fallen, Peleus' son. 

The Trito-born, the passing-wise, beheld 
And pitied him, and showered upon his head 
Ambrosia, which hath virtue aye to keep 
Taintless, men say, the flesh of warriors slain. 
Like softly-breathing sleeper dewy-fresh 
She made him: over that dead face she drew 
A stern frown, even as when he lay, with wrath 
Darkening his grim face, clasping his slain friend 
Patroclus; and she made his frame to be 
More massive, like a war-god to behold. 
And wonder seized the Argives, as they thronged 
And saw the image of a living man, 
Where all the stately length of Peleus' son 
Lay on the couch, and seemed as though he slept. 

Around him all the woeful captive-maids, 
Whom he had taken for a prey, what time 
He had ravaged hallowed Lemnos, and had scaled 
The towered crags of Thebes, Eetion's town, 
Wailed, as they stood and rent their fair young flesh, 
And smote their breasts, and from their hearts bemoaned 
That lord of gentleness and courtesy, 
Who honoured even the daughters of his foes. 
And stricken most of all with heart-sick pain 
Briseis, hero Achilles' couchmate, bowed 
Over the dead, and tore her fair young flesh 
With ruthless fingers, shrieking: her soft breast 
Was ridged with gory weals, so cruelly 
She smote it thou hadst said that crimson blood 
Had dripped on milk. Yet, in her griefs despite, 
Her winsome loveliness shone out, and grace 
Hung like a veil about her, as she wailed: 
"Woe for this grief passing all griefs beside! 
Never on me came anguish like to this 
Not when my brethren died, my fatherland 
Was wasted -- like this anguish for thy death! 
Thou wast my day, my sunlight, my sweet life, 
Mine hope of good, my strong defence from harm, 
Dearer than all my beauty -- yea, more dear 
Than my lost parents! Thou wast all in all 
To me, thou only, captive though I be. 
Thou tookest from me every bondmaid's task 
And like a wife didst hold me. Ah, but now 
Me shall some new Achaean master bear 
To fertile Sparta, or to thirsty Argos. 
The bitter cup of thraldom shall I drain, 
Severed, ah me, from thee! Oh that the earth 
Had veiled my dead face ere I saw thy doom!" 

So for slain Peleus' son did she lament 
With woeful handmaids and heart-anguished Greeks, 
Mourning a king, a husband. Never dried 
Her tears were: ever to the earth they streamed 
Like sunless water trickling from a rock 
While rime and snow yet mantle o'er the earth 
Above it; yet the frost melts down before 
The east-wind and the flame-shafts of the sun. 

Now came the sound of that upringing wail 
To Nereus' Daughters, dwellers in the depths 
Unfathomed. With sore anguish all their hearts 
Were smitten: piteously they moaned: their cry 
Shivered along the waves of Hellespont. 
Then with dark mantles overpalled they sped 
Swiftly to where the Argive men were thronged. 
As rushed their troop up silver paths of sea, 
The flood disported round them as they came. 
With one wild cry they floated up; it rang, 
A sound as when fleet-flying cranes forebode 
A great storm. Moaned the monsters of the deep 
Plaintively round that train of mourners. Fast 
On sped they to their goal, with awesome cry 
Wailing the while their sister's mighty son. 
Swiftly from Helicon the Muses came 
Heart-burdened with undying grief, for love 
And honour to the Nereid starry-eyed. 

Then Zeus with courage filled the Argive men, 
That-eyes of flesh might undismayed behold 
That glorious gathering of Goddesses. 
Then those Divine Ones round Achilles' corse 
Pealed forth with one voice from immortal lips 
A lamentation. Rang again the shores 
Of Hellespont. As rain upon the earth 
Their tears fell round the dead man, Aeacus' son; 
For out of depths of sorrow rose their moan. 
And all the armour, yea, the tents, the ships 
Of that great sorrowing multitude were wet 
With tears from ever-welling springs of grief. 
His mother cast her on him, clasping him, 
And kissed her son's lips, crying through her tears: 
"Now let the rosy-vestured Dawn in heaven 
Exult! Now let broad-flowing Axius 
Exult, and for Asteropaeus dead 
Put by his wrath! Let Priam's seed be glad 
But I unto Olympus will ascend, 
And at the feet of everlasting Zeus 
Will cast me, bitterly planning that he gave 
Me, an unwilling bride, unto a man -- 
A man whom joyless eld soon overtook, 
To whom the Fates are near, with death for gift. 
Yet not so much for his lot do I grieve 
As for Achilles; for Zeus promised me 
To make him glorious in the Aeacid halls, 
In recompense for the bridal I so loathed 
That into wild wind now I changed me, now 
To water, now in fashion as a bird 
I was, now as the blast of flame; nor might 
A mortal win me for his bride, who seemed 
All shapes in turn that earth and heaven contain, 
Until the Olympian pledged him to bestow 
A godlike son on me, a lord of war. 
Yea, in a manner this did he fulfil 
Faithfully; for my son was mightiest 
Of men. But Zeus made brief his span of life 
Unto my sorrow. Therefore up to heaven 
Will I: to Zeus's mansion will I go 
And wail my son, and will put Zeus in mind 
Of all my travail for him and his sons 
In their sore stress, and sting his soul with shame." 

So in her wild lament the Sea-queen cried. 
But now to Thetis spake Calliope, 
She in whose heart was steadfast wisdom throned: 
"From lamentation, Thetis, now forbear, 
And do not, in the frenzy of thy grief 
For thy lost son, provoke to wrath the Lord 
Of Gods and men. Lo, even sons of Zeus, 
The Thunder-king, have perished, overborne 
By evil fate. Immortal though I be, 
Mine own son Orpheus died, whose magic song 
Drew all the forest-trees to follow him, 
And every craggy rock and river-stream, 
And blasts of winds shrill-piping stormy-breathed, 
And birds that dart through air on rushing wings. 
Yet I endured mine heavy sorrow: Gods 
Ought not with anguished grief to vex their souls. 
Therefore make end of sorrow-stricken wail 
For thy brave child; for to the sons of earth 
Minstrels shall chant his glory and his might, 
By mine and by my sisters' inspiration, 
Unto the end of time. Let not thy soul 
Be crushed by dark grief, nor do thou lament 
Like those frail mortal women. Know'st thou not 
That round all men which dwell upon the earth 
Hovereth irresistible deadly Fate, 
Who recks not even of the Gods? Such power 
She only hath for heritage. Yea, she 
Soon shall destroy gold-wealthy Priam's town, 
And Trojans many and Argives doom to death, 
Whomso she will. No God can stay her hand." 

So in her wisdom spake Calliope. 
Then plunged the sun down into Ocean's stream, 
And sable-vestured Night came floating up 
O'er the wide firmament, and brought her boon 
Of sleep to sorrowing mortals. On the sands 
There slept they, all the Achaean host, with heads 
Bowed 'neath the burden of calamity. 
But upon Thetis sleep laid not his hand: 
Still with the deathless Nereids by the sea 
She sate; on either side the Muses spake 
One after other comfortable words 
To make that sorrowing heart forget its pain. 

But when with a triumphant laugh the Dawn 
Soared up the sky, and her most radiant light 
Shed over all the Trojans and their king, 
Then, sorrowing sorely for Achilles still, 
The Danaans woke to weep. Day after day, 
For many days they wept. Around them moaned 
Far-stretching beaches of the sea, and mourned 
Great Nereus for his daughter Thetis' sake; 
And mourned with him the other Sea-gods all 
For dead Achilles. Then the Argives gave 
The corpse of great Peleides to the flame. 
A pyre of countless tree-trunks built they up 
Which, all with one mind toiling, from the heights 
Of Ida they brought down; for Atreus' sons 
Sped on the work, and charged them to bring thence 
Wood without measure, that consumed with speed 
Might be Achilles' body. All around 
Piled they about the pyre much battle-gear 
Of strong men slain; and slew and cast thereon 
Full many goodly sons of Trojan men, 
And snorting steeds, and mighty bulls withal, 
And sheep and fatling swine thereon they cast. 
And wailing captive maids from coffers brought 
Mantles untold; all cast they on the pyre: 
Gold heaped they there and amber. All their hair 
The Myrmidons shore, and shrouded with the same 
The body of their king. Briseis laid 
Her own shorn tresses on the corpse, her gift, 
Her last, unto her lord. Great jars of oil 
Full many poured they out thereon, with jars 
Of honey and of wine, rich blood of the grape 
That breathed an odour as of nectar, yea, 
Cast incense-breathing perfumes manifold 
Marvellous sweet, the precious things put forth 
By earth, and treasures of the sea divine. 

Then, when all things were set in readiness 
About the pyre, all, footmen, charioteers, 
Compassed that woeful bale, clashing their arms, 
While, from the viewless heights Olympian, Zeus 
Rained down ambrosia on dead Aeacus' son. 
For honour to the Goddess, Nereus' child, 
He sent to Aeolus Hermes, bidding him 
Summon the sacred might of his swift winds, 
For that the corpse of Aeacus' son must now 
Be burned. With speed he went, and Aeolus 
Refused not: the tempestuous North in haste 
He summoned, and the wild blast of the West; 
And to Troy sped they on their whirlwind wings. 
Fast in mad onrush, fast across the deep 
They darted; roared beneath them as they flew 
The sea, the land; above crashed thunder-voiced 
Clouds headlong hurtling through the firmament. 
Then by decree of Zeus down on the pyre 
Of slain Achilles, like a charging host 
Swooped they; upleapt the Fire-god's madding breath: 
Uprose a long wail from the Myrmidons. 
Then, though with whirlwind rushes toiled the winds, 
All day, all night, they needs must fan the flames 
Ere that death-pyre burned out. Up to the heavens 
Vast-volumed rolled the smoke. The huge tree-trunks 
Groaned, writhing, bursting, in the heat, and dropped 
The dark-grey ash all round. So when the winds 
Had tirelessly fulfilled their mighty task, 
Back to their cave they rode cloud-charioted. 

Then, when the fire had last of all consumed 
That hero-king, when all the steeds, the men 
Slain round the pyre had first been ravined up, 
With all the costly offerings laid around 
The mighty dead by Achaia's weeping sons, 
The glowing embers did the Myrmidons quench 
With wine. Then clear to be discerned were seen 
His bones; for nowise like the rest were they, 
But like an ancient Giant's; none beside 
With these were blent; for bulls and steeds, and sons 
Of Troy, with all that mingled hecatomb, 
Lay in a wide ring round his corse, and he 
Amidst them, flame-devoured, lay there alone. 
So his companions groaning gathered up 
His bones, and in a silver casket laid 
Massy and deep, and banded and bestarred 
With flashing gold; and Nereus' daughters shed 
Ambrosia over them, and precious nards 
For honour to Achilles: fat of kine 
And amber honey poured they over all. 
A golden vase his mother gave, the gift 
In old time of the Wine-god, glorious work 
Of the craft-master Fire-god, in the which 
They laid the casket that enclosed the bones 
Of mighty-souled Achilles. All around 
The Argives heaped a barrow, a giant sign, 
Upon a foreland's uttermost end, beside 
The Hellespont's deep waters, wailing loud 
Farewells unto the Myrmidons' hero-king. 

Nor stayed the immortal steeds of Aeacus' son 
Tearless beside the ships; they also mourned 
Their slain king: sorely loth were they to abide 
Longer mid mortal men or Argive steeds 
Bearing a burden of consuming grief; 
But fain were they to soar through air, afar 
From wretched men, over the Ocean's streams, 
Over the Sea-queen's caverns, unto where 
Divine Podarge bare that storm-foot twain 
Begotten of the West-wind clarion-voiced 
Yea, and they had accomplished their desire, 
But the Gods' purpose held them back, until 
From Scyros' isle Achilles' fleetfoot son 
Should come. Him waited they to welcome, when 
He came unto the war-host; for the Fates, 
Daughters of holy Chaos, at their birth 
Had spun the life-threads of those deathless foals, 
Even to serve Poseidon first, and next 
Peleus the dauntless king, Achilles then 
The invincible, and, after these, the fourth, 
The mighty-hearted Neoptolemus, 
Whom after death to the Elysian Plain 
They were to bear, unto the Blessed Land, 
By Zeus' decree. For which cause, though their hearts 
Were pierced with bitter anguish, they abode 
Still by the ships, with spirits sorrowing 
For their old lord, and yearning for the new. 

Then from the surge of heavy-plunging seas 
Rose the Earth-shaker. No man saw his feet 
Pace up the strand, but suddenly he stood 
Beside the Nereid Goddesses, and spake 
To Thetis, yet for Achilles bowed with grief: 
"Refrain from endless mourning for thy son. 
Not with the dead shall he abide, but dwell 
With Gods, as doth the might of Herakles, 
And Dionysus ever fair. Not him 
Dread doom shall prison in darkness evermore, 
Nor Hades keep him. To the light of Zeus 
Soon shall he rise; and I will give to him 
A holy island for my gift: it lies 
Within the Euxine Sea: there evermore 
A God thy son shall be. The tribes that dwell 
Around shall as mine own self honour him 
With incense and with steam of sacrifice. 
Hush thy laments, vex not thine heart with grief." 

Then like a wind-breath had he passed away 
Over the sea, when that consoling word 
Was spoken; and a little in her breast 
Revived the spirit of Thetis: and the God 
Brought this to pass thereafter. All the host 
Moved moaning thence, and came unto the ships 
That brought them o'er from Hellas. Then returned 
To Helicon the Muses: 'neath the sea, 
Wailing the dear dead, Nereus' Daughters sank, 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IV

How in the Funeral-Games of Achilles Heroes Contended 

Nor did the hapless Trojans leave unwept 
The warrior-king Hippolochus' hero-son, 
But laid, in front of the Dardanian gate, 
Upon the pyre that captain war-renowned. 
But him Apollo's self caught swiftly up 
Out of the blazing fire, and to the winds 
Gave him, to bear away to Lycia-land; 
And fast and far they bare him, 'neath the glens 
Of high Telandrus, to a lovely glade; 
And for a monument above his grave 
Upheaved a granite rock. The Nymphs therefrom 
Made gush the hallowed water of a stream 
For ever flowing, which the tribes of men 
Still call fair-fleeting Glaucus. This the gods 
Wrought for an honour to the Lycian king. 

But for Achilles still the Argives mourned 
Beside the swift ships: heart-sick were they all 
With dolorous pain and grief. Each yearned for him 
As for a son; no eye in that wide host 
Was tearless. But the Trojans with great joy 
Exulted, seeing their sorrow from afar, 
And the great fire that spake their foe consumed. 
And thus a vaunting voice amidst them cried: 
"Now hath Cronion from his heaven vouchsafed 
A joy past hope unto our longing eyes, 
To see Achilles fallen before Troy. 
Now he is smitten down, the glorious hosts 
Of Troy, I trow, shall win a breathing-space 
From blood of death and from the murderous fray. 
Ever his heart devised the Trojans' bane; 
In his hands maddened aye the spear of doom 
With gore besprent, and none of us that faced 
Him in the fight beheld another dawn. 
But now, I wot, Achaea's valorous sons 
Shall flee unto their galleys shapely-prowed, 
Since slain Achilles lies. Ah that the might 
Of Hector still were here, that he might slay 
The Argives one and all amidst their tents!" 

So in unbridled joy a Trojan cried; 
But one more wise and prudent answered him: 
"Thou deemest that yon murderous Danaan host 
Will straightway get them to the ships, to flee 
Over the misty sea. Nay, still their lust 
Is hot for fight: us will they nowise fear, 
Still are there left strong battle-eager men, 
As Aias, as Tydeides, Atreus' sons: 
Though dead Achilles be, I still fear these. 
Oh that Apollo Silverbow would end them! 
Then in that day were given to our prayers 
A breathing-space from war and ghastly death." 

In heaven was dole among the Immortal Ones, 
Even all that helped the stalwart Danaans' cause. 
In clouds like mountains piled they veiled their heads 
For grief of soul. But glad those others were 
Who fain would speed Troy to a happy goal. 
Then unto Cronos' Son great Hera spake: 
"Zeus, Lightning-father, wherefore helpest thou 
Troy, all forgetful of the fair-haired bride 
Whom once to Peleus thou didst give to wife 
Midst Pelion's glens? Thyself didst bring to pass 
Those spousals of a Goddess: on that day 
All we Immortals feasted there, and gave 
Gifts passing-fair. All this dost thou forget, 
And hast devised for Hellas heaviest woe." 

So spake she; but Zeus answered not a word; 
For pondering there he sat with burdened breast, 
Thinking how soon the Argives should destroy 
The city of Priam, thinking how himself 
Would visit on the victors ruin dread 
In war and on the great sea thunder-voiced. 
Such thoughts were his, ere long to be fulfilled. 

Now sank the sun to Ocean's fathomless flood: 
O'er the dim land the infinite darkness stole, 
Wherein men gain a little rest from toil. 
Then by the ships, despite their sorrow, supped 
The Argives, for ye cannot thrust aside 
Hunger's importunate craving, when it comes 
Upon the breast, but straightway heavy and faint 
Lithe limbs become; nor is there remedy 
Until one satisfy this clamorous guest 
Therefore these ate the meat of eventide 
In grief for Achilles' hard necessity 
Constrained them all. And, when they had broken bread, 
Sweet sleep came on them, loosening from their frames 
Care's heavy chain, and quickening strength anew 

But when the starry Bears had eastward turned 
Their heads, expectant of the uprushing light 
Of Helios, and when woke the Queen of Dawn, 
Then rose from sleep the stalwart Argive men 
Purposing for the Trojans death and doom. 
Stirred were they like the roughly-ridging sea 
Icarian, or as sudden-rippling corn 
In harvest field, what time the rushing wings 
Of the cloud-gathering West sweep over it; 
So upon Hellespont's strand the folk were stirred. 
And to those eager hearts cried Tydeus' son: 
"If we be battle-biders, friends, indeed, 
More fiercely fight we now the hated foe, 
Lest they take heart because Achilles lives 
No longer. Come, with armour, car, and steed 
Let us beset them. Glory waits our toil?" 

But battle-eager Aias answering spake 
"Brave be thy words, and nowise idle talk, 
Kindling the dauntless Argive men, whose hearts 
Before were battle-eager, to the fight 
Against the Trojan men, O Tydeus' son. 
But we must needs abide amidst the ships 
Till Goddess Thetis come forth of the sea; 
For that her heart is purposed to set here 
Fair athlete-prizes for the funeral-games. 
This yesterday she told me, ere she plunged 
Into sea-depths, yea, spake to me apart 
From other Danaans; and, I trow, by this 
Her haste hath brought her nigh. Yon Trojan men, 
Though Peleus' son hath died, shall have small heart 
For battle, while myself am yet alive, 
And thou, and noble Atreus' son, the king." 

So spake the mighty son of Telamon, 
But knew not that a dark and bitter doom 
For him should follow hard upon those games 
By Fate's contrivance. Answered Tydeus' son 
"O friend, if Thetis comes indeed this day 
With goodly gifts for her son's funeral-games, 
Then bide we by the ships, and keep we here 
All others. Meet it is to do the will 
Of the Immortals: yea, to Achilles too, 
Though the Immortals willed it not, ourselves 
Must render honour grateful to the dead." 

So spake the battle-eager Tydeus' son. 
And lo, the Bride of Peleus gliding came 
Forth of the sea, like the still breath of dawn, 
And suddenly was with the Argive throng 
Where eager-faced they waited, some, that looked 
Soon to contend in that great athlete-strife, 
And some, to joy in seeing the mighty strive. 
Amidst that gathering Thetis sable-stoled 
Set down her prizes, and she summoned forth 
Achaea's champions: at her best they came. 

But first amidst them all rose Neleus' son, 
Not as desiring in the strife of fists 
To toil, nor strain of wrestling; for his arms 
And all his sinews were with grievous eld 
Outworn, but still his heart and brain were strong. 
Of all the Achaeans none could match himself 
Against him in the folkmote's war of words; 
Yea, even Laertes' glorious son to him 
Ever gave place when men for speech were met; 
Nor he alone, but even the kingliest 
Of Argives, Agamemnon, lord of spears. 
Now in their midst he sang the gracious Queen 
Of Nereids, sang how she in willsomeness 
Of beauty was of all the Sea-maids chief. 
Well-pleased she hearkened. Yet again he sang, 
Singing of Peleus' Bridal of Delight, 
Which all the blest Immortals brought to pass 
By Pelion's crests; sang of the ambrosial feast 
When the swift Hours brought in immortal hands 
Meats not of earth, and heaped in golden maunds; 
Sang how the silver tables were set forth 
In haste by Themis blithely laughing; sang 
How breathed Hephaestus purest flame of fire; 
Sang how the Nymphs in golden chalices 
Mingled ambrosia; sang the ravishing dance 
Twined by the Graces' feet; sang of the chant 
The Muses raised, and how its spell enthralled 
All mountains, rivers, all the forest brood; 
How raptured was the infinite firmament, 
Cheiron's fair caverns, yea, the very Gods. 

Such noble strain did Neleus' son pour out 
Into the Argives' eager ears; and they 
Hearkened with ravished souls. Then in their midst 
He sang once more the imperishable deeds 
Of princely Achilles. All the mighty throng 
Acclaimed him with delight. From that beginning 
With fitly chosen words did he extol 
The glorious hero; how he voyaged and smote 
Twelve cities; how he marched o'er leagues on leagues 
Of land, and spoiled eleven; how he slew 
Telephus and Eetion's might renowned 
In Thebe; how his spear laid Cyenus low, 
Poseidon's son, and godlike Polydorus, 
Troilus the goodly, princely Asteropaeus; 
And how he dyed with blood the river-streams 
Of Xanthus, and with countless corpses choked 
His murmuring flow, when from the limbs he tore 
Lycaon's life beside the sounding river; 
And how he smote down Hector; how he slew 
Penthesileia, and the godlike son 
Of splendour-throned Dawn; -- all this he sang 
To Argives which already knew the tale; 
Sang of his giant mould, how no man's strength 
In fight could stand against him, nor in games 
Where strong men strive for mastery, where the swift 
Contend with flying feet or hurrying wheels 
Of chariots, nor in combat panoplied; 
And how in goodlihead he far outshone 
All Danaans, and how his bodily might 
Was measureless in the stormy clash of war. 
Last, he prayed Heaven that he might see a son 
Like that great sire from sea-washed Scyros come. 

That noble song acclaiming Argives praised; 
Yea, silver-looted Thetis smiled, and gave 
The singer fleetfoot horses, given of old 
Beside Caicus' mouth by Telephus 
To Achilles, when he healed the torturing wound 
With that same spear wherewith himself had pierced 
Telephus' thigh, and thrust the point clear through. 
These Nestor Neleus' son to his comrades gave, 
And, glorying in their godlike lord, they led 
The steeds unto his ships. Then Thetis set 
Amidst the athlete-ring ten kine, to be 
Her prizes for the footrace, and by each 
Ran a fair suckling calf. These the bold might 
Of Peleus' tireless son had driven down 
From slopes of Ida, prizes of his spear. 

To strive for these rose up two victory-fain, 
Teucer the first, the son of Telamon, 
And Aias, of the Locrian archers chief. 
These twain with swift hands girded them about 
With loin-cloths, reverencing the Goddess-bride 
Of Peleus, and the Sea-maids, who with her 
Came to behold the Argives' athlete-sport. 
And Atreus' son, lord of all Argive men, 
Showed them the turning-goal of that swift course. 
Then these the Queen of Rivalry spurred on, 
As from the starting-line like falcons swift 
They sped away. Long doubtful was the race: 
Now, as the Argives gazed, would Aias' friends 
Shout, now rang out the answering cheer from friends 
Of Teucer. But when in their eager speed 
Close on the end they were, then Teucer's feet 
Were trammelled by unearthly powers: some god 
Or demon dashed his foot against the stock 
Of a deep-rooted tamarisk. Sorely wrenched 
Was his left ankle: round the joint upswelled 
The veins high-ridged. A great shout rang from all 
That watched the contest. Aias darted past 
Exultant: ran his Locrian folk to hail 
Their lord, with sudden joy in all their souls. 
Then to his ships they drave the kine, and cast 
Fodder before them. Eager-helpful friends 
Led Teucer halting thence. The leeches drew 
Blood from his foot: then over it they laid 
Soft-shredded linen ointment-smeared, and swathed 
With smooth bands round, and charmed away the pain. 

Then swiftly rose two mighty-hearted ones 
Eager to match their strength in wrestling strain, 
The son of Tydeus and the giant Aias. 
Into the midst they strode, and marvelling gazed 
The Argives on men shapen like to gods. 
Then grappled they, like lions famine-stung 
Fighting amidst the mountains o'er a stag, 
Whose strength is even-balanced; no whit less 
Is one than other in their deadly rage; 
So these long time in might were even-matched, 
Till Aias locked his strong hands round the son 
Of Tydeus, straining hard to break his back; 
But he, with wrestling-craft and strength combined, 
Shifted his hip 'neath Telamon's son, and heaved 
The giant up; with a side-twist wrenched free 
From Aias' ankle-lock his thigh, and so 
With one huge shoulder-heave to earth he threw 
That mighty champion, and himself came down 
Astride him: then a mighty shout went up. 
But battle-stormer Aias, chafed in mind, 
Sprang up, hot-eager to essay again 
That grim encounter. From his terrible hands 
He dashed the dust, and challenged furiously 
With a great voice Tydeides: not a whit 
That other quailed, but rushed to close with him. 
Rolled up the dust in clouds from 'neath their feet: 
Hurtling they met like battling mountain-bulls 
That clash to prove their dauntless strength, and spurn 
The dust, while with their roaring all the hills 
Re-echo: in their desperate fury these 
Dash their strong heads together, straining long 
Against each other with their massive strength, 
Hard-panting in the fierce rage of their strife, 
While from their mouths drip foam-flakes to the ground; 
So strained they twain with grapple of brawny hands. 
'Neath that hard grip their backs and sinewy necks 
Cracked, even as when in mountain-glades the trees 
Dash storm-tormented boughs together. Oft 
Tydeides clutched at Aias' brawny thighs, 
But could not stir his steadfast-rooted feet. 
Oft Aias hurled his whole weight on him, bowed 
His shoulders backward, strove to press him down; 
And to new grips their hands were shifting aye. 
All round the gazing people shouted, some 
Cheering on glorious Tydeus' son, and some 
The might of Aias. Then the giant swung 
The shoulders of his foe to right, to left; 
Then gripped him 'neath the waist; with one fierce heave

And giant effort hurled him like a stone 
To earth. The floor of Troyland rang again 
As fell Tydeides: shouted all the folk. 
Yet leapt he up all eager to contend 
With giant Aias for the third last fall: 
But Nestor rose and spake unto the twain: 
"From grapple of wrestling, noble sons, forbear; 
For all we know that ye be mightiest 
Of Argives since the great Achilles died." 

Then these from toil refrained, and from their brows 
Wiped with their hands the plenteous-streaming sweat: 
They kissed each other, and forgat their strife. 
Then Thetis, queen of Goddesses, gave to them 
Four handmaids; and those strong and aweless ones 
Marvelled beholding them, for these surpassed 
All captive-maids in beauty and household-skill, 
Save only lovely-tressed Briseis. These 
Achilles captive brought from Lesbos' Isle, 
And in their service joyed. The first was made 
Stewardess of the feast and lady of meats; 
The second to the feasters poured the wine; 
The third shed water on their hands thereafter; 
The fourth bare all away, the banquet done. 
These Tydeus' son and giant Aias shared, 
And, parted two and two, unto their ships 
Sent they those fair and serviceable ones. 

Next, for the play of fists Idomeneus rose, 
For cunning was he in all athlete-lore; 
But none came forth to meet him, yielding all 
To him, the elder-born, with reverent awe. 
So in their midst gave Thetis unto him 
A chariot and fleet steeds, which theretofore 
Mighty Patroclus from the ranks of Troy 
Drave, when he slew Sarpedon, seed of Zeus, 
These to his henchmen gave Idomeneus 
To drive unto the ships: himself remained 
Still sitting in the glorious athlete-ring. 
Then Phoenix to the stalwart Argives cried: 
"Now to Idomeneus the Gods have given 
A fair prize uncontested, free of toil 
Of mighty arms and shoulders, honouring 
The elder-born with bloodless victory. 
But lo, ye younger men, another prize 
Awaiteth the swift play of cunning hands. 
Step forth then: gladden great Peleides' soul." 

He spake, they heard; but each on other looked, 
And, loth to essay the contest, all sat still, 
Till Neleus' son rebuked those laggard souls: 
"Friends, it were shame that men should shun the play 
Of clenched hands, who in that noble sport 
Have skill, wherein young men delight, which links 
Glory to toil. Ah that my thews were strong 
As when we held King Pelias' funeral-feast, 
I and Acastus, kinsmen joining hands, 
When I with godlike Polydeuces stood 
In gauntlet-strife, in even-balanced fray, 
And when Ancaeus in the wrestlers' ring 
Mightier than all beside, yet feared and shrank 
From me, and dared not strive with me that day, 
For that ere then amidst the Epeian men -- 
No battle-blenchers they! -- I had vanquished him, 
For all his might, and dashed him to the dust 
By dead Amaryncus' tomb, and thousands round 
Sat marvelling at my prowess and my strength. 
Therefore against me not a second time 
Raised he his hands, strong wrestler though he were; 
And so I won an uncontested prize. 
But now old age is on me, and many griefs. 
Therefore I bid you, whom it well beseems, 
To win the prize; for glory crowns the youth 
Who bears away the meed of athlete-strife." 

Stirred by his gallant chiding, a brave man 
Rose, son of haughty godlike Panopeus, 
The man who framed the Horse, the bane of Troy, 
Not long thereafter. None dared meet him now 
In play of fists, albeit in deadly craft 
Of war, when Ares rusheth through the field, 
He was not cunning. But for strife of hands 
The fair prize uncontested had been won 
By stout Epeius -- yea, he was at point 
To bear it thence unto the Achaean ships; 
But one strode forth to meet him, Theseus' son, 
The spearman Acamas, the mighty of heart, 
Bearing already on his swift hands girt 
The hard hide-gauntlets, which Evenor's son 
Agelaus on his prince's hands had drawn 
With courage-kindling words. The comrades then 
Of Panopeus' princely son for Epeius raised 
A heartening cheer. He like a lion stood 
Forth in the midst, his strong hands gauntleted 
With bull's hide hard as horn. Loud rang the cheers 
From side to side of that great throng, to fire 
The courage of the mighty ones to clash 
Hands in the gory play. Sooth, little spur 
Needed they for their eagerness for fight. 
But, ere they closed, they flashed out proving blows 
To wot if still, as theretofore, their arms 
Were limber and lithe, unclogged by toil of war; 
Then faced each other, and upraised their hands 
With ever-watching eyes, and short quick steps 
A-tiptoe, and with ever-shifting feet, 
Each still eluding other's crushing might. 
Then with a rush they closed like thunder-clouds 
Hurled on each other by the tempest-blast, 
Flashing forth lightnings, while the welkin thrills 
As clash the clouds and hollow roar the winds; 
So 'neath the hard hide-gauntlets clashed their jaws. 
Down streamed the blood, and from their brows the sweat 
Blood-streaked made on the flushed cheeks crimson bars. 
Fierce without pause they fought, and never flagged 
Epeius, but threw all his stormy strength 
Into his onrush. Yet did Theseus' son 
Never lose heart, but baffled the straight blows 
Of those strong hands, and by his fighting-craft 
Flinging them right and left, leapt in, brought home 
A blow to his eyebrow, cutting to the bone. 
Even then with counter-stroke Epeius reached 
Acamas' temple, and hurled him to the ground. 
Swift he sprang up, and on his stalwart foe 
Rushed, smote his head: as he rushed in again, 
The other, slightly swerving, sent his left 
Clean to his brow; his right, with all his might 
Behind it, to his nose. Yet Acamas still 
Warded and struck with all the manifold shifts 
Of fighting-craft. But now the Achaeans all 
Bade stop the fight, though eager still were both 
To strive for coveted victory. Then came 
Their henchmen, and the gory gauntlets loosed 
In haste from those strong hands. Now drew they breath 
From that great labour, as they bathed their brows 
With sponges myriad-pored. Comrades and friends 
With pleading words then drew them face to face, 
And prayed, "In friendship straight forget your wrath." 
So to their comrades' suasion hearkened they; 
For wise men ever bear a placable mind. 
They kissed each other, and their hearts forgat 
That bitter strife. Then Thetis sable-stoled 
Gave to their glad hands two great silver bowls 
The which Euneus, Jason's warrior son 
In sea-washed Lemnos to Achilles gave 
To ransom strong Lycaon from his hands. 
These had Hephaestus fashioned for his gift 
To glorious Dionysus, when he brought 
His bride divine to Olympus, Minos' child 
Far-famous, whom in sea-washed Dia's isle 
Theseus unwitting left. The Wine-god brimmed 
With nectar these, and gave them to his son; 
And Thoas at his death to Hypsipyle 
With great possessions left them. She bequeathed 
The bowls to her godlike son, who gave them up 
Unto Achilles for Lycaon's life. 
The one the son of lordly Theseus took, 
And goodly Epeius sent to his ship with joy 
The other. Then their bruises and their scars 
Did Podaleirius tend with loving care. 
First pressed he out black humours, then his hands 
Deftly knit up the gashes: salves he laid 
Thereover, given him by his sire of old, 
Such as had virtue in one day to heal 
The deadliest hurts, yea, seeming-cureless wounds. 
Straight was the smart assuaged, and healed the scars 
Upon their brows and 'neath their clustering hair 

Then for the archery-test Oileus' son 
Stood forth with Teucer, they which in the race 
Erewhile contended. Far away from these 
Agamemnon, lord of spears, set up a helm 
Crested with plumes, and spake: "The master-shot 
Is that which shears the hair-crest clean away." 
Then straightway Aias shot his arrow first, 
And smote the helm-ridge: sharply rang the brass. 
Then Teucer second with most earnest heed 
Shot: the swift shaft hath shorn the plume away. 
Loud shouted all the people as they gazed, 
And praised him without stint, for still his foot 
Halted in pain, yet nowise marred his aim 
When with his hands he sped the flying shaft. 
Then Peleus' bride gave unto him the arms 
Of godlike Troilus, the goodliest 
Of all fair sons whom Hecuba had borne 
In hallowed Troy; yet of his goodlihead 
No joy she had; the prowess and the spear 
Of fell Achilles reft his life from him. 
As when a gardener with new-whetted scythe 
Mows down, ere it may seed, a blade of corn 
Or poppy, in a garden dewy-fresh 
And blossom-flushed, which by a water-course 
Crowdeth its blooms -- mows it ere it may reach 
Its goal of bringing offspring to the birth, 
And with his scythe-sweep makes its life-work vain 
And barren of all issue, nevermore 
Now to be fostered by the dews of spring; 
So did Peleides cut down Priam's son 
The god-like beautiful, the beardless yet 
And virgin of a bride, almost a child! 
Yet the Destroyer Fate had lured him on 
To war, upon the threshold of glad youth, 
When youth is bold, and the heart feels no void. 

Forthwith a bar of iron massy and long 
From the swift-speeding hand did many essay 
To hurl; but not an Argive could prevail 
To cast that ponderous mass. Aias alone 
Sped it from his strong hand, as in the time 
Of harvest might a reaper fling from him 
A dry oak-bough, when all the fields are parched. 
And all men marvelled to behold how far 
Flew from his hand the bronze which scarce two men 
Hard-straining had uplifted from the ground. 
Even this Antaeus' might was wont to hurl 
Erstwhile, ere the strong hands of Hercules 
O'ermastered him. This, with much spoil beside, 
Hercules took, and kept it to make sport 
For his invincible hand; but afterward 
Gave it to valiant Peleus, who with him 
Had smitten fair-towered Ilium's burg renowned; 
And he to Achilles gave it, whose swift ships 
Bare it to Troy, to put him aye in mind 
Of his own father, as with eager will 
He fought with stalwart Trojans, and to be 
A worthy test wherewith to prove his strength. 
Even this did Aias from his brawny hand 
Fling far. So then the Nereid gave to him 
The glorious arms from godlike Memnon stripped. 
Marvelling the Argives gazed on them: they were 
A giant's war-gear. Laughing a glad laugh 
That man renowned received them: he alone 
Could wear them on his brawny limbs; they seemed 
As they had even been moulded to his frame. 
The great bar thence he bore withal, to be 
His joy when he was fain of athlete-toil. 

Still sped the contests on; and many rose 
Now for the leaping. Far beyond the marks 
Of all the rest brave Agapenor sprang: 
Loud shouted all for that victorious leap; 
And Thetis gave him the fair battle-gear 
Of mighty Cycnus, who had smitten first 
Protesilaus, then had reft the life 
From many more, till Peleus' son slew him 
First of the chiefs of grief-enshrouded Troy. 

Next, in the javelin-cast Euryalus 
Hurled far beyond all rivals, while the folk 
Shouted aloud: no archer, so they deemed, 
Could speed a winged shaft farther than his cast; 
Therefore the Aeacid hero's mother gave 
To him a deep wide silver oil-flask, ta'en 
By Achilles in possession, when his spear 
Slew Mynes, and he spoiled Lyrnessus' wealth. 

Then fiery-hearted Aias eagerly 
Rose, challenging to strife of hands and feet 
The mightiest hero there; but marvelling 
They marked his mighty thews, and no man dared 
Confront him. Chilling dread had palsied all 
Their courage: from their hearts they feared him, lest 
His hands invincible should all to-break 
His adversary's face, and naught but pain 
Be that man's meed. But at the last all men 
Made signs to battle-bider Euryalus, 
For well they knew him skilled in fighting-craft; 
But he too feared that giant, and he cried: 
"Friends, any other Achaean, whom ye will, 
Blithe will I face; but mighty Alas -- no! 
Far doth he overmatch me. He will rend 
Mine heart, if in the onset anger rise 
Within him: from his hands invincible, 
I trow, I should not win to the ships alive." 

Loud laughed they all: but glowed with triumph-joy 
The heart of Aias. Gleaming talents twain 
Of silver he from Thetis' hands received, 
His uncontested prize. His stately height 
Called to her mind her dear son, and she sighed. 

They which had skill in chariot-driving then 
Rose at the contest's summons eagerly: 
Menelaus first, Eurypylus bold in fight, 
Eumelus, Thoas, godlike Polypoetes 
Harnessed their steeds, and led them to the cars 
All panting for the joy of victory. 
Then rode they in a glittering chariot rank 
Out to one place, to a stretch of sand, and stood 
Ranged at the starting-line. The reins they grasped 
In strong hands quickly, while the chariot-steeds 
Shoulder to shoulder fretted, all afire 
To take the lead at starting, pawed the sand, 
Pricked ears, and o'er their frontlets flung the foam. 
With sudden-stiffened sinews those ear-lords 
Lashed with their whips the tempest-looted steeds; 
Then swift as Harpies sprang they forth; they strained 
Furiously at the harness, onward whirling 
The chariots bounding ever from the earth. 
Thou couldst not see a wheel-track, no, nor print 
Of hoof upon the sand -- they verily flew. 
Up from the plain the dust-clouds to the sky 
Soared, like the smoke of burning, or a mist 
Rolled round the mountain-forelands by the might 
Of the dark South-wind or the West, when wakes 
A tempest, when the hill-sides stream with rain. 
Burst to the front Eumelus' steeds: behind 
Close pressed the team of godlike Thoas: shouts 
Still answered shouts that cheered each chariot, while 
Onward they swept across the wide-wayed plain. 

((LACUNA)) 

"From hallowed Elis, when he had achieved 
A mighty triumph, in that he outstripped 
The swift ear of Oenomaus evil-souled, 
The ruthless slayer of youths who sought to wed 
His daughter Hippodameia passing-wise. 
Yet even he, for all his chariot-lore, 
Had no such fleetfoot steeds as Atreus' son -- 
Far slower! -- the wind is in the feet of these." 

So spake he, giving glory to the might 
Of those good steeds, and to Atreides' self; 
And filled with joy was Menelaus' soul. 
Straightway his henchmen from the yoke-band loosed 
The panting team, and all those chariot-lords, 
Who in the race had striven, now unyoked 
Their tempest-footed steeds. Podaleirius then 
Hasted to spread salves over all the wounds 
Of Thoas and Eurypylus, gashes scored 
Upon their frames when from the cars they fell 
But Menelaus with exceeding joy 
Of victory glowed, when Thetis 1ovely-tressed 
Gave him a golden cup, the chief possession 
Once of Eetion the godlike; ere 
Achilles spoiled the far-famed burg of Thebes. 

Then horsemen riding upon horses came 
Down to the course: they grasped in hand the whip 
And bounding from the earth bestrode their steeds, 
The while with foaming mouths the coursers champed 
The bits, and pawed the ground, and fretted aye 
To dash into the course. Forth from the line 
Swiftly they darted, eager for the strife, 
Wild as the blasts of roaring Boreas 
Or shouting Notus, when with hurricane-swoop 
He heaves the wide sea high, when in the east 
Uprises the disastrous Altar-star 
Bringing calamity to seafarers; 
So swift they rushed, spurning with flying feet 
The deep dust on the plain. The riders cried 
Each to his steed, and ever plied the lash 
And shook the reins about the clashing bits. 
On strained the horses: from the people rose 
A shouting like the roaring of a sea. 
On, on across the level plain they flew; 
And now the flashing-footed Argive steed 
By Sthenelus bestridden, had won the race, 
But from the course he swerved, and o'er the plain 
Once and again rushed wide; nor Capaneus' son, 
Good horseman though he were, could turn him back 
By rein or whip, because that steed was strange 
Still to the race-course; yet of lineage 
Noble was he, for in his veins the blood 
Of swift Arion ran, the foal begotten 
By the loud-piping West-wind on a Harpy, 
The fleetest of all earth-born steeds, whose feet 
Could race against his father's swiftest blasts. 
Him did the Blessed to Adrastus give: 
And from him sprang the steed of Sthenelus, 
Which Tydeus' son had given unto his friend 
In hallowed Troyland. Filled with confidence 
In those swift feet his rider led him forth 
Unto the contest of the steeds that day, 
Looking his horsemanship should surely win 
Renown: yet victory gladdened not his heart 
In that great struggle for Achilles' prizes; 
Nay, swift albeit he was, the King of Men 
By skill outraced him. Shouted all the folk, 
"Glory to Agamemnon!" Yet they acclaimed 
The steed of valiant Sthenelus and his lord, 
For that the fiery flying of his feet 
Still won him second place, albeit oft 
Wide of the course he swerved. Then Thetis gave 
To Atreus' son, while laughed his lips for joy, 
God-sprung Polydorus' breastplate silver-wrought. 
To Sthenelus Asteropaeus' massy helm, 
Two lances, and a taslet strong, she gave. 
Yea, and to all the riders who that day 
Came at Achilles' funeral-feast to strive 
She gave gifts. But the son of the old war-lord, 
Laertes, inly grieved to be withheld 
From contests of the strong, how fain soe'er, 
By that sore wound which Alcon dealt to him 
In the grim fight around dead Aeacas' son. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK V

How the Arms of Achilles Were Cause of Madness and Death Unto Aias

So when all other contests had an end, 
Thetis the Goddess laid down in the midst 
Great-souled Achilles' arms divinely wrought; 
And all around flashed out the cunning work 
Wherewith the Fire-god overchased the shield 
Fashioned for Aeacus' son, the dauntless-souled. 

Inwrought upon that labour of a God 
Were first high heaven and cloudland, and beneath 
Lay earth and sea: the winds, the clouds were there, 
The moon and sun, each in its several place; 
There too were all the stars that, fixed in heaven, 
Are borne in its eternal circlings round. 
Above and through all was the infinite air 
Where to and fro flit birds of slender beak: 
Thou hadst said they lived, and floated on the breeze. 
Here Tethys' all-embracing arms were wrought, 
And Ocean's fathomless flow. The outrushing flood 
Of rivers crying to the echoing hills 
All round, to right, to left, rolled o'er the land. 

Round it rose league-long mountain-ridges, haunts 
Of terrible lions and foul jackals: there 
Fierce bears and panthers prowled; with these were seen 
Wild boars that whetted deadly-clashing tusks 
In grimly-frothing jaws. There hunters sped 
After the hounds: beaters with stone and dart, 
To the life portrayed, toiled in the woodland sport. 

And there were man-devouring wars, and all 
Horrors of fight: slain men were falling down 
Mid horse-hoofs; and the likeness of a plain 
Blood-drenched was on that shield invincible. 
Panic was there, and Dread, and ghastly Enyo 
With limbs all gore-bespattered hideously, 
And deadly Strife, and the Avenging Spirits 
Fierce-hearted -- she, still goading warriors on 
To the onset they, outbreathing breath of fire. 
Around them hovered the relentless Fates; 
Beside them Battle incarnate onward pressed 
Yelling, and from their limbs streamed blood and sweat. 
There were the ruthless Gorgons: through their hair 
Horribly serpents coiled with flickering tongues. 
A measureless marvel was that cunning work 
Of things that made men shudder to behold 
Seeming as though they verily lived and moved. 

And while here all war's marvels were portrayed, 
Yonder were all the works of lovely peace. 
The myriad tribes of much-enduring men 
Dwelt in fair cities. Justice watched o'er all. 
To diverse toils they set their hands; the fields 
Were harvest-laden; earth her increase bore. 

Most steeply rose on that god-laboured work 
The rugged flanks of holy Honour's mount, 
And there upon a palm-tree throned she sat 
Exalted, and her hands reached up to heaven. 
All round her, paths broken by many rocks 
Thwarted the climbers' feet; by those steep tracks 
Daunted ye saw returning many folk: 
Few won by sweat of toil the sacred height. 

And there were reapers moving down long swaths 
Swinging the whetted sickles: 'neath their hands 
The hot work sped to its close. Hard after these 
Many sheaf-binders followed, and the work 
Grew passing great. With yoke-bands on their necks 
Oxen were there, whereof some drew the wains 
Heaped high with full-eared sheaves, and further on 
Were others ploughing, and the glebe showed black 
Behind them. Youths with ever-busy goads 
Followed: a world of toil was there portrayed. 

And there a banquet was, with pipe and harp, 
Dances of maids, and flashing feet of boys, 
All in swift movement, like to living souls. 

Hard by the dance and its sweet winsomeness 
Out of the sea was rising lovely-crowned 
Cypris, foam-blossoms still upon her hair; 
And round her hovered smiling witchingly 
Desire, and danced the Graces lovely-tressed. 

And there were lordly Nereus' Daughters shown 
Leading their sister up from the wide sea 
To her espousals with the warrior-king. 
And round her all the Immortals banqueted 
On Pelion's ridge far-stretching. All about 
Lush dewy watermeads there were, bestarred 
With flowers innumerable, grassy groves, 
And springs with clear transparent water bright. 

There ships with sighing sheets swept o'er the sea, 
Some beating up to windward, some that sped 
Before a following wind, and round them heaved 
The melancholy surge. Seared shipmen rushed 
This way and that, adread for tempest-gusts, 
Hauling the white sails in, to 'scape the death -- 
It all seemed real -- some tugging at the oars, 
While the dark sea on either side the ship 
Grew hoary 'neath the swiftly-plashing blades. 

And there triumphant the Earth-shaker rode 
Amid sea-monsters' stormy-footed steeds 
Drew him, and seemed alive, as o'er the deep 
They raced, oft smitten by the golden whip. 
Around their path of flight the waves fell smooth, 
And all before them was unrippled calm. 
Dolphins on either hand about their king 
Swarmed, in wild rapture of homage bowing backs, 
And seemed like live things o'er the hazy sea 
Swimming, albeit all of silver wrought. 

Marvels of untold craft were imaged there 
By cunning-souled Hephaestus' deathless hands 
Upon the shield. And Ocean's fathomless flood 
Clasped like a garland all the outer rim, 
And compassed all the strong shield's curious work. 

And therebeside the massy helmet lay. 
Zeus in his wrath was set upon the crest 
Throned on heaven's dome; the Immortals all around 
Fierce-battling with the Titans fought for Zeus. 
Already were their foes enwrapped with flame, 
For thick and fast as snowflakes poured from heaven 
The thunderbolts: the might of Zeus was roused, 
And burning giants seemed to breathe out flames. 

And therebeside the fair strong corslet lay, 
Unpierceable, which clasped Peleides once: 
There were the greaves close-lapping, light alone 
To Achilles; massy of mould and huge they were. 

And hard by flashed the sword whose edge and point 
No mail could turn, with golden belt, and sheath 
Of silver, and with haft of ivory: 
Brightest amid those wondrous arms it shone. 
Stretched on the earth thereby was that dread spear, 
Long as the tall-tressed pines of Pelion, 
Still breathing out the reek of Hector's blood. 

Then mid the Argives Thetis sable-stoled 
In her deep sorrow for Achilles spake; 
"Now all the athlete-prizes have been won 
Which I set forth in sorrow for my child. 
Now let that mightiest of the Argives come 
Who rescued from the foe my dead: to him 
These glorious and immortal arms I give 
Which even the blessed Deathless joyed to see." 

Then rose in rivalry, each claiming them, 
Laertes' seed and godlike Telamon's son, 
Aias, the mightiest far of Danaan men: 
He seemed the star that in the glittering sky 
Outshines the host of heaven, Hesperus, 
So splendid by Peleides' arms he stood; 
"And let these judge," he cried, "Idomeneus, 
Nestor, and kingly-counselled Agamemnon," 
For these, he weened, would sureliest know the truth 
Of deeds wrought in that glorious battle-toil. 
"To these I also trust most utterly," 
Odysseus said, "for prudent of their wit 
Be these, and princeliest of all Danaan men." 

But to Idomeneus and Atreus' son 
Spake Nestor apart, and willingly they heard: 
"Friends, a great woe and unendurable 
This day the careless Gods have laid on us, 
In that into this lamentable strife 
Aias the mighty hath been thrust by them 
Against Odysseus passing-wise. For he, 
To whichsoe'er God gives the victor's glory -- 
O yea, he shall rejoice! But he that 1oseth -- 
All for the grief in all the Danaans' hearts 
For him! And ours shall be the deepest grief 
Of all; for that man will not in the war 
Stand by us as of old. A sorrowful day 
It shall be for us, whichsoe'er of these 
Shall break into fierce anger, seeing they 
Are of our heroes chiefest, this in war, 
And that in counsel. Hearken then to me, 
Seeing that I am older far than ye, 
Not by a few years only: with mine age 
Is prudence joined, for I have suffered and wrought 
Much; and in counsel ever the old man, 
Who knoweth much, excelleth younger men. 
Therefore let us ordain to judge this cause 
'Twixt godlike Aias and war-fain Odysseus, 
Our Trojan captives. They shall say whom most 
Our foes dread, and who saved Peleides' corse 
From that most deadly fight. Lo, in our midst 
Be many spear-won Trojans, thralls of Fate; 
And these will pass true judgment on these twain, 
To neither showing favour, since they hate 
Alike all authors of their misery." 

He spake: replied Agamemnon lord of spears: 
"Ancient, there is none other in our midst 
Wiser than thou, of Danaans young or old, 
In that thou say'st that unforgiving wrath 
Will burn in him to whom the Gods herein 
Deny the victory; for these which strive 
Are both our chiefest. Therefore mine heart too 
Is set on this, that to the thralls of war 
This judgment we commit: the loser then 
Shall against Troy devise his deadly work 
Of vengeance, and shall not be wroth with us." 

He spake, and these three, being of one mind, 
In hearing of all men refused to judge 
Judgment so thankless: they would none of it. 
Therefore they set the high-born sons of Troy 
There in the midst, spear-thralls although they were, 
To give just judgment in the warriors' strife. 
Then in hot anger Aias rose, and spake: 
"Odysseus, frantic soul, why hath a God 
Deluded thee, to make thee hold thyself 
My peer in might invincible? Dar'st thou say 
That thou, when slain Achilles lay in dust, 
When round him swarmed the Trojans, didst bear back 
That furious throng, when I amidst them hurled 
Death, and thou coweredst away? Thy dam 
Bare thee a craven and a weakling wretch 
Frail in comparison of me, as is 
A cur beside a lion thunder-voiced! 
No battle-biding heart is in thy breast, 
But wiles and treachery be all thy care. 
Hast thou forgotten how thou didst shrink back 
From faring with Achaea's gathered host 
To Ilium's holy burg, till Atreus' sons 
Forced thee, the cowering craven, how loth soe'er, 
To follow them -- would God thou hadst never come! 
For by thy counsel left we in Lemnos' isle 
Groaning in agony Poeas' son renowned. 
And not for him alone was ruin devised 
Of thee; for godlike Palamedes too 
Didst thou contrive destruction -- ha, he was 
Alike in battle and council better than thou! 
And now thou dar'st to rise up against me, 
Neither remembering my kindness, nor 
Having respect unto the mightier man 
Who rescued thee erewhile, when thou didst quaff 
In fight before the onset of thy foes, 
When thou, forsaken of all Greeks beside, 
Midst tumult of the fray, wast fleeing too! 
Oh that in that great fight Zeus' self had stayed 
My dauntless might with thunder from his heaven! 
Then with their two-edged swords the Trojan men 
Had hewn thee limb from limb, and to their dogs 
Had cast thy carrion! Then thou hadst not presumed 
To meet me, trusting in thy trickeries! 
Wretch, wherefore, if thou vauntest thee in might 
Beyond all others, hast thou set thy ships 
In the line's centre, screened from foes, nor dared 
As I, on the far wing to draw them up? 
Because thou wast afraid! Not thou it was 
Who savedst from devouring fire the ships; 
But I with heart unquailing there stood fast 
Facing the fire and Hector ay, even he 
Gave back before me everywhere in fight. 
Thou -- thou didst fear him aye with deadly fear! 
Oh, had this our contention been but set 
Amidst that very battle, when the roar 
Of conflict rose around Achilles slain! 
Then had thine own eyes seen me bearing forth 
Out from the battle's heart and fury of foes 
That goodly armour and its hero lord 
Unto the tents. But here thou canst but trust 
In cunning speech, and covetest a place 
Amongst the mighty! Thou -- thou hast not strength 
To wear Achilles' arms invincible, 
Nor sway his massy spear in thy weak hands! 
But I they are verily moulded to my frame: 
Yea, seemly it is I wear those glorious arms, 
Who shall not shame a God's gifts passing fair. 
But wherefore for Achilles' glorious arms 
With words discourteous wrangling stand we here? 
Come, let us try in strife with brazen spears 
Who of us twain is best in murderous right! 
For silver-footed Thetis set in the midst 
This prize for prowess, not for pestilent words. 
In folkmote may men have some use for words: 
In pride of prowess I know me above thee far, 
And great Achilles' lineage is mine own." 

He spake: with scornful glance and bitter speech 
Odysseus the resourceful chode with him: 
"Aias, unbridled tongue, why these vain words 
To me? Thou hast called me pestilent, niddering, 
And weakling: yet I boast me better far 
Than thou in wit and speech, which things increase 
The strength of men. Lo, how the craggy rock, 
Adamantine though it seem, the hewers of stone 
Amid the hills by wisdom undermine 
Full lightly, and by wisdom shipmen cross 
The thunderous-plunging sea, when mountain-high 
It surgeth, and by craft do hunters quell 
Strong lions, panthers, boars, yea, all the brood 
Of wild things. Furious-hearted bulls are tamed 
To bear the yoke-bands by device of men. 
Yea, all things are by wit accomplished. Still 
It is the man who knoweth that excels 
The witless man alike in toils and counsels. 
For my keen wit did Oeneus' valiant son 
Choose me of all men with him to draw nigh 
To Hector's watchmen: yea, and mighty deeds 
We twain accomplished. I it was who brought 
To Atreus' sons Peleides far-renowned, 
Their battle-helper. Whensoe'er the host 
Needeth some other champion, not for the sake 
Of thine hands will he come, nor by the rede 
Of other Argives: of Achaeans I 
Alone will draw him with soft suasive words 
To where strong men are warring. Mighty power 
The tongue hath over men, when courtesy 
Inspires it. Valour is a deedless thing; 
And bulk and big assemblage of a man 
Cometh to naught, by wisdom unattended. 
But unto me the Immortals gave both strength 
And wisdom, and unto the Argive host 
Made me a blessing. Nor, as thou hast said, 
Hast thou in time past saved me when in flight 
From foes. I never fled, but steadfastly 
Withstood the charge of all the Trojan host. 
Furious the enemy came on like a flood 
But I by might of hands cut short the thread 
Of many lives. Herein thou sayest not true 
Me in the fray thou didst not shield nor save, 
But for thine own life roughtest, lest a spear 
Should pierce thy back if thou shouldst turn to flee 
From war. My ships? I drew them up mid-line, 
Not dreading the battle-fury of any foe, 
But to bring healing unto Atreus' sons 
Of war's calamities: and thou didst set 
Far from their help thy ships. Nay more, I seamed 
With cruel stripes my body, and entered so 
The Trojans' burg, that I might learn of them 
All their devisings for this troublous war. 
Nor ever I dreaded Hector's spear; myself 
Rose mid the foremost, eager for the fight, 
When, prowess-confident, he defied us all. 
Yea, in the fight around Achilles, I 
Slew foes far more than thou; 'twas I who saved 
The dead king with this armour. Not a whit 
I dread thy spear now, but my grievous hurt 
With pain still vexeth me, the wound I gat 
In fighting for these arms and their slain lord. 
In me as in Achilles is Zeus' blood." 

He spake; strong Aias answered him again. 
"Most cunning and most pestilent of men, 
Nor I, nor any other Argive, saw 
Thee toiling in that fray, when Trojans strove 
Fiercely to hale away Achilles slain. 
My might it was that with the spear unstrung 
The knees of some in fight, and others thrilled 
With panic as they pressed on ceaselessly. 
Then fled they in dire straits, as geese or cranes 
Flee from an eagle swooping as they feed 
Along a grassy meadow; so, in dread 
The Trojans shrinking backward from my spear 
And lightening sword, fled into Ilium 
To 'scape destruction. If thy might came there 
Ever at all, not anywhere nigh me 
With foes thou foughtest: somewhere far aloot 
Mid other ranks thou toiledst, nowhere nigh 
Achilles, where the one great battle raged." 

He spake; replied Odysseus the shrewd heart: 
"Aias, I hold myself no worse than thou 
In wit or might, how goodly in outward show 
Thou be soever. Nay, I am keener far 
Of wit than thou in all the Argives' eyes. 
In battle-prowess do I equal thee 
Haply surpass; and this the Trojans know, 
Who tremble when they see me from afar. 
Aye, thou too know'st, and others know my strength 
By that hard struggle in the wrestling-match, 
When Peleus' son set glorious prizes forth 
Beside the barrow of Patroclus slain." 

So spake Laertes' son the world-renowned. 
Then on that strife disastrous of the strong 
The sons of Troy gave judgment. Victory 
And those immortal arms awarded they 
With one consent to Odysseus mighty in war. 
Greatly his soul rejoiced; but one deep groan 
Brake from the Greeks. Then Aias' noble might 
Stood frozen stiff; and suddenly fell on him 
Dark wilderment; all blood within his frame 
Boiled, and his gall swelled, bursting forth in flood. 
Against his liver heaved his bowels; his heart 
With anguished pangs was thrilled; fierce stabbing throes

Shot through the filmy veil 'twixt bone and brain; 
And darkness and confusion wrapped his mind. 
With fixed eyes staring on the ground he stood 
Still as a statue. Then his sorrowing friends 
Closed round him, led him to the shapely ships, 
Aye murmuring consolations. But his feet 
Trod for the last time, with reluctant steps, 
That path; and hard behind him followed Doom. 

When to the ships beside the boundless sea 
The Argives, faint for supper and for sleep, 
Had passed, into the great deep Thetis plunged, 
And all the Nereids with her. Round them swam 
Sea-monsters many, children of the brine. 

Against the wise Prometheus bitter-wroth 
The Sea-maids were, remembering how that Zeus, 
Moved by his prophecies, unto Peleus gave 
Thetis to wife, a most unwilling bride. 
Then cried in wrath to these Cymothoe: 
"O that the pestilent prophet had endured 
All pangs he merited, when, deep-burrowing, 
The eagle tare his liver aye renewed!" 

So to the dark-haired Sea-maids cried the Nymph. 
Then sank the sun: the onrush of the night 
Shadowed the fields, the heavens were star-bestrewn; 
And by the long-prowed ships the Argives slept 
By ambrosial sleep o'ermastered, and by wine 
The which from proud Idomeneus' realm of Crete: 
The shipmen bare o'er foaming leagues of sea. 

But Aias, wroth against the Argive men, 
Would none of meat or drink, nor clasped him round 
The arms of sleep. In fury he donned his mail, 
He clutched his sword, thinking unspeakable thoughts; 
For now he thought to set the ships aflame, 
And slaughter all the Argives, now, to hew 
With sudden onslaught of his terrible sword 
Guileful Odysseus limb from limb. Such things 
He purposed -- nay, had soon accomplished all, 
Had Pallas not with madness smitten him; 
For over Odysseus, strong to endure, her heart 
Yearned, as she called to mind the sacrifices 
Offered to her of him continually. 
Therefore she turned aside from Argive men 
The might of Aias. As a terrible storm, 
Whose wings are laden with dread hurricane-blasts, 
Cometh with portents of heart-numbing fear 
To shipmen, when the Pleiads, fleeing adread 
From glorious Orion, plunge beneath 
The stream of tireless Ocean, when the air 
Is turmoil, and the sea is mad with storm; 
So rushed he, whithersoe'er his feet might bear. 
This way and that he ran, like some fierce beast 
Which darteth down a rock-walled glen's ravines 
With foaming jaws, and murderous intent 
Against the hounds and huntsmen, who have torn 
Out of the cave her cubs, and slain: she runs 
This way and that, and roars, if mid the brakes 
Haply she yet may see the dear ones lost; 
Whom if a man meet in that maddened mood, 
Straightway his darkest of all days hath dawned; 
So ruthless-raving rushed he; blackly boiled 
His heart, as caldron on the Fire-god's hearth 
Maddens with ceaseless hissing o'er the flames 
From blazing billets coiling round its sides, 
At bidding of the toiler eager-souled 
To singe the bristles of a huge-fed boar; 
So was his great heart boiling in his breast. 
Like a wild sea he raved, like tempest-blast, 
Like the winged might of tireless flame amidst 
The mountains maddened by a mighty wind, 
When the wide-blazing forest crumbles down 
In fervent heat. So Aias, his fierce heart 
With agony stabbed, in maddened misery raved. 
Foam frothed about his lips; a beast-like roar 
Howled from his throat. About his shoulders clashed 
His armour. They which saw him trembled, all 
Cowed by the fearful shout of that one man. 

From Ocean then uprose Dawn golden-reined: 
Like a soft wind upfloated Sleep to heaven, 
And there met Hera, even then returned 
To Olympus back from Tethys, unto whom 
But yester-morn she went. She clasped him round, 
And kissed him, who had been her marriage-kin 
Since at her prayer on Ida's erest he had lulled 
To sleep Cronion, when his anger burned 
Against the Argives. Straightway Hera passed 
To Zeus's mansion, and Sleep swiftly flew 
To Pasithea's couch. From slumber woke 
All nations of the earth. But Aias, like 
Orion the invincible, prowled on, 
Still bearing murderous madness in his heart. 
He rushed upon the sheep, like lion fierce 
Whose savage heart is stung with hunger-pangs. 
Here, there, he smote them, laid them dead in dust 
Thick as the leaves which the strong North-wind's might 
Strews, when the waning year to winter turns; 
So on the sheep in fury Aias fell, 
Deeming he dealt to Danaans evil doom. 

Then to his brother Menelaus came, 
And spake, but not in hearing of the rest: 
"This day shall surely be a ruinous day 
For all, since Aias thus is sense-distraught. 
It may be he will set the ships aflame, 
And slay us all amidst our tents, in wrath 
For those lost arms. Would God that Thetis ne'er 
Had set them for the prize of rivalry! 
Would God Laertes' son had not presumed 
In folly of soul to strive with a better man! 
Fools were we all; and some malignant God 
Beguiled us; for the one great war-defence 
Left us, since Aeacus' son in battle fell, 
Was Aias' mighty strength. And now the Gods 
Will to our loss destroy him, bringing bane 
On thee and me, that all we may fill up 
The cup of doom, and pass to nothingness." 

He spake; replied Agamemnon, lord of spears: 
"Now nay, Menelaus, though thine heart he wrung, 
Be thou not wroth with the resourceful king 
Of Cephallenian folk, but with the Gods 
Who plot our ruin. Blame not him, who oft 
Hath been our blessing and our enemies' curse." 

So heavy-hearted spake the Danaan kings. 
But by the streams of Xanthus far away 
'Neath tamarisks shepherds cowered to hide from death, 
As when from a swift eagle cower hares 
'Neath tangled copses, when with sharp fierce scream 
This way and that with wings wide-shadowing 
He wheeleth very nigh; so they here, there, 
Quailed from the presence of that furious man. 
At last above a slaughtered ram he stood, 
And with a deadly laugh he cried to it: 
"Lie there in dust; be meat for dogs and kites! 
Achilles' glorious arms have saved not thee, 
For which thy folly strove with a better man! 
Lie there, thou cur! No wife shall fall on thee, 
And clasp, and wail thee and her fatherless childs, 
Nor shalt thou greet thy parents' longing eyes, 
The staff of their old age! Far from thy land 
Thy carrion dogs and vultures shall devour!" 

So cried he, thinking that amidst the slain 
Odysseus lay blood-boltered at his feet. 
But in that moment from his mind and eyes 
Athena tore away the nightmare-fiend 
Of Madness havoc-breathing, and it passed 
Thence swiftly to the rock-walled river Styx 
Where dwell the winged Erinnyes, they which still 
Visit with torments overweening men. 

Then Aias saw those sheep upon the earth 
Gasping in death; and sore amazed he stood, 
For he divined that by the Blessed Ones 
His senses had been cheated. All his limbs 
Failed under him; his soul was anguished-thrilled: 
He could not in his horror take one step 
Forward nor backward. Like some towering rock 
Fast-rooted mid the mountains, there he stood. 
But when the wild rout of his thoughts had rallied, 
He groaned in misery, and in anguish wailed: 
"Ah me! why do the Gods abhor me so? 
They have wrecked my mind, have with fell madness filled,

Making me slaughter all these innocent sheep! 
Would God that on Odysseus' pestilent heart 
Mine hands had so avenged me! Miscreant, he 
Brought on me a fell curse! O may his soul 
Suffer all torments that the Avenging Fiends 
Devise for villains! On all other Greeks 
May they bring murderous battle, woeful griefs, 
And chiefly on Agamemnon, Atreus' son! 
Not scatheless to the home may he return 
So long desired! But why should I consort, 
I, a brave man, with the abominable? 
Perish the Argive host, perish my life, 
Now unendurable! The brave no more 
Hath his due guerdon, but the baser sort 
Are honoured most and loved, as this Odysseus 
Hath worship mid the Greeks: but utterly 
Have they forgotten me and all my deeds, 
All that I wrought and suffered in their cause." 

So spake the brave son of strong Telamon, 
Then thrust the sword of Hector through his throat. 
Forth rushed the blood in torrent: in the dust 
Outstretched he lay, like Typhon, when the bolts 
Of Zeus had blasted him. Around him groaned 
The dark earth as he fell upon her breast. 

Then thronging came the Danaans, when they saw 
Low laid in dust the hero; but ere then 
None dared draw nigh him, but in deadly fear 
They watched him from afar. Now hasted they 
And flung themselves upon the dead, outstretched 
Upon their faces: on their heads they cast 
Dust, and their wailing went up to the sky. 
As when men drive away the tender lambs 
Out of the fleecy flock, to feast thereon, 
And round the desolate pens the mothers leap 
Ceaselessly bleating, so o'er Aias rang 
That day a very great and bitter cry. 
Wild echoes pealed from Ida forest-palled, 
And from the plain, the ships, the boundless sea. 

Then Teucer clasping him was minded too 
To rush on bitter doom: howbeit the rest 
Held from the sword his hand. Anguished he fell 
Upon the dead, outpouring many a tear 
More comfortlessly than the orphan babe 
That wails beside the hearth, with ashes strewn 
On head and shoulders, wails bereavement's day 
That brings death to the mother who hath nursed 
The fatherless child; so wailed he, ever wailed 
His great death-stricken brother, creeping slow 
Around the corpse, and uttering his lament: 
"O Aias, mighty-souled, why was thine heart 
Distraught, that thou shouldst deal unto thyself 
Murder and bale? All, was it that the sons 
Of Troy might win a breathing-space from woes, 
Might come and slay the Greeks, now thou art not? 
From these shall all the olden courage fail 
When fast they fall in fight. Their shield from harm 
s broken now! For me, I have no will 
To see mine home again, now thou art dead. 
Nay, but I long here also now to die, 
That so the earth may shroud me -- me and thee 
Not for my parents so much do I care, 
If haply yet they live, if haply yet 
Spared from the grave, in Salamis they dwell, 
As for thee, O my glory and my crown!" 

So cried he groaning sore; with answering moan 
Queenly Tecmessa wailed, the princess-bride 
Of noble Aias, captive of his spear, 
Yet ta'en by him to wife, and household-queen 
O'er all his substance, even all that wives 
Won with a bride-price rule for wedded lords. 
Clasped in his mighty arms, she bare to him 
A son Eurysaces, in all things like 
Unto his father, far as babe might be 
Yet cradled in his tent. With bitter moan 
Fell she on that dear corpse, all her fair form 
Close-shrouded in her veil, and dust-defiled, 
And from her anguished heart cried piteously: 
"Alas for me, for me now thou art dead, 
Not by the hands of foes in fight struck down, 
But by thine own! On me is come a grief 
Ever-abiding! Never had I looked 
To see thy woeful death-day here by Troy. 
Ah, visions shattered by rude hands of Fate! 
Oh that the earth had yawned wide for my grave 
Ere I beheld thy bitter doom! On me 
No sharper, more heart-piercing pang hath come -- 
No, not when first from fatherland afar 
And parents thou didst bear me, wailing sore 
Mid other captives, when the day of bondage 
Had come on me, a princess theretofore. 
Not for that dear lost home so much I grieve, 
Nor for my parents dead, as now for thee: 
For all thine heart was kindness unto me 
The hapless, and thou madest me thy wife, 
One soul with thee; yea, and thou promisedst 
To throne me queen of fair-towered Salamis, 
When home we won from Troy. The Gods denied 
Accomplishment thereof. And thou hast passed 
Unto the Unseen Land: thou hast forgot 
Me and thy child, who never shall make glad 
His father's heart, shall never mount thy throne. 
But him shall strangers make a wretched thrall: 
For when the father is no more, the babe 
Is ward of meaner men. A weary life 
The orphan knows, and suffering cometh in 
From every side upon him like a flood. 
To me too thraldom's day shall doubtless come, 
Now thou hast died, who wast my god on earth." 

Then in all kindness Agamemnon spake: 
"Princess, no man on earth shall make thee thrall, 
While Teucer liveth yet, while yet I live. 
Thou shalt have worship of us evermore 
And honour as a Goddess, with thy son, 
As though yet living were that godlike man, 
Aias, who was the Achaeans' chiefest strength. 
Ah that he had not laid this load of grief 
On all, in dying by his own right hand! 
For all the countless armies of his foes 
Never availed to slay him in fair fight." 

So spake he, grieved to the inmost heart. The folk 
Woefully wafted all round. O'er Hellespont 
Echoes of mourning rolled: the sighing air 
Darkened around, a wide-spread sorrow-pall. 
Yea, grief laid hold on wise Odysseus' self 
For the great dead, and with remorseful soul 
To anguish-stricken Argives thus he spake: 
"O friends, there is no greater curse to men 
Than wrath, which groweth till its bitter fruit 
Is strife. Now wrath hath goaded Aias on 
To this dire issue of the rage that filled 
His soul against me. Would to God that ne'er 
Yon Trojans in the strife for Achilles' arms 
Had crowned me with that victory, for which 
Strong Telamon's brave son, in agony 
Of soul, thus perished by his own right hand! 
Yet blame not me, I pray you, for his wrath: 
Blame the dark dolorous Fate that struck him down. 
For, had mine heart foreboded aught of this, 
This desperation of a soul distraught, 
Never for victory had I striven with him, 
Nor had I suffered any Danaan else, 
Though ne'er so eager, to contend with him. 
Nay, I had taken up those arms divine 
With mine own hands, and gladly given them 
To him, ay, though himself desired it not. 
But for such mighty grief and wrath in him 
I had not looked, since not for a woman's sake 
Nor for a city, nor possessions wide, 
I then contended, but for Honour's meed, 
Which alway is for all right-hearted men 
The happy goal of all their rivalry. 
But that great-hearted man was led astray 
By Fate, the hateful fiend; for surely it is 
Unworthy a man to be made passion's fool. 
The wise man's part is, steadfast-souled to endure 
All ills, and not to rage against his lot." 

So spake Laertes' son, the far-renowned. 
But when they all were weary of grief and groan, 
Then to those sorrowing ones spake Neleus' son: 
"O friends, the pitiless-hearted Fates have laid 
Stroke after stroke of sorrow upon us, 
Sorrow for Aias dead, for mighty Achilles, 
For many an Argive, and for mine own son 
Antilochus. Yet all unmeet it is 
Day after day with passion of grief to wail 
Men slain in battle: nay, we must forget 
Laments, and turn us to the better task 
Of rendering dues beseeming to the dead, 
The dues of pyre, of tomb, of bones inurned. 
No lamentations will awake the dead; 
No note thereof he taketh, when the Fates, 
The ruthless ones, have swallowed him in night." 

So spake he words of cheer: the godlike kings 
Gathered with heavy hearts around the dead, 
And many hands upheaved the giant corpse, 
And swiftly bare him to the ships, and there 
Washed they away the blood that clotted lay 
Dust-flecked on mighty limbs and armour: then 
In linen swathed him round. From Ida's heights 
Wood without measure did the young men bring, 
And piled it round the corpse. Billets and logs 
Yet more in a wide circle heaped they round; 
And sheep they laid thereon, fair-woven vests, 
And goodly kine, and speed-triumphant steeds, 
And gleaming gold, and armour without stint, 
From slain foes by that glorious hero stripped. 
And lucent amber-drops they laid thereon, 
Years, say they, which the Daughters of the Sun, 
The Lord of Omens, shed for Phaethon slain, 
When by Eridanus' flood they mourned for him. 
These, for undying honour to his son, 
The God made amber, precious in men's eyes. 
Even this the Argives on that broad-based pyre 
Cast freely, honouring the mighty dead. 
And round him, groaning heavily, they laid 
Silver most fair and precious ivory, 
And jars of oil, and whatsoe'er beside 
They have who heap up goodly and glorious wealth. 
Then thrust they in the strength of ravening flame, 
And from the sea there breathed a wind, sent forth 
By Thetis, to consume the giant frame 
Of Aias. All the night and all the morn 
Burned 'neath the urgent stress of that great wind 
Beside the ships that giant form, as when 
Enceladus by Zeus' levin was consumed 
Beneath Thrinacia, when from all the isle 
Smoke of his burning rose -- or like as when 
Hercules, trapped by Nessus' deadly guile, 
Gave to devouring fire his living limbs, 
What time he dared that awful deed, when groaned 
All Oeta as he burned alive, and passed 
His soul into the air, leaving the man 
Far-famous, to be numbered with the Gods, 
When earth closed o'er his toil-tried mortal part. 
So huge amid the flames, all-armour clad, 
Lay Aias, all the joy of fight forgot, 
While a great multitude watching thronged the sands. 
Glad were the Trojans, but the Achaeans grieved. 

But when that goodly frame by ravening fire 
Was all consumed, they quenched the pyre with wine; 
They gathered up the bones, and reverently 
Laid in a golden casket. Hard beside 
Rhoeteium's headland heaped they up a mound 
Measureless-high. Then scattered they amidst 
The long ships, heavy-hearted for the man 
Whom they had honoured even as Achilles. 
Then black night, bearing unto all men sleep, 
Upfloated: so they brake bread, and lay down 
Waiting the Child of the Mist. Short was sleep, 
Broken by fitful staring through the dark, 
Haunted by dread lest in the night the foe 
Should fall on them, now Telamon's son was dead. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VI

How Came for the Helping of Troy Eurypylus, Hercules' Grandson

Rose Dawn from Ocean and Tithonus' bed, 
And climbed the steeps of heaven, scattering round 
Flushed flakes of splendour; laughed all earth and air. 
Then turned unto their labours, each to each, 
Mortals, frail creatures daily dying. Then 
Streamed to a folkmote all the Achaean men 
At Menelaus' summons. When the host 
Were gathered all, then in their midst he spake: 
"Hearken my words, ye god-descended kings: 
Mine heart within my breast is burdened sore 
For men which perish, men that for my sake 
Came to the bitter war, whose home-return 
Parents and home shall welcome nevermore; 
For Fate hath cut off thousands in their prime. 
Oh that the heavy hand of death had fallen 
On me, ere hitherward I gathered these! 
But now hath God laid on me cureless pain 
In seeing all these ills. Who could rejoice 
Beholding strivings, struggles of despair? 
Come, let us, which be yet alive, in haste 
Flee in the ships, each to his several land, 
Since Aias and Achilles both are dead. 
I look not, now they are slain, that we the rest 
Shall 'scape destruction; nay, but we shall fall 
Before yon terrible Trojans for my sake 
And shameless Helen's! Think not that I care 
For her: for you I care, when I behold 
Good men in battle slain. Away with her -- 
Her and her paltry paramour! The Gods 
Stole all discretion out of her false heart 
When she forsook mine home and marriage-bed. 
Let Priam and the Trojans cherish her! 
But let us straight return: 'twere better far 
To flee from dolorous war than perish all." 

So spake he but to try the Argive men. 
Far other thoughts than these made his heart burn 
With passionate desire to slay his foes, 
To break the long walls of their city down 
From their foundations, and to glut with blood 
Ares, when Paris mid the slain should fall. 
Fiercer is naught than passionate desire! 
Thus as he pondered, sitting in his place, 
Uprose Tydeides, shaker of the shield, 
And chode in fiery speech with Menelaus: 
"O coward Atreus' son, what craven fear 
Hath gripped thee, that thou speakest so to us 
As might a weakling child or woman speak? 
Not unto thee Achaea's noblest sons 
Will hearken, ere Troy's coronal of towers 
Be wholly dashed to the dust: for unto men 
Valour is high renown, and flight is shame! 
If any man shall hearken to the words 
Of this thy counsel, I will smite from him 
His head with sharp blue steel, and hurl it down 
For soaring kites to feast on. Up! all ye 
Who care to enkindle men to battle: rouse 
Our warriors all throughout the fleet to whet 
The spear, to burnish corslet, helm and shield; 
And cause both man and horse, all which be keen 
In fight, to break their fast. Then in yon plain 
Who is the stronger Ares shall decide." 

So speaking, in his place he sat him down; 
Then rose up Thestor's son, and in the midst, 
Where meet it is to speak, stood forth and cried: 
"Hear me, ye sons of battle-biding Greeks: 
Ye know I have the spirit of prophecy. 
Erewhile I said that ye in the tenth year 
Should lay waste towered Ilium: this the Gods 
Are even now fulfilling; victory lies 
At the Argives' very feet. Come, let us send 
Tydeides and Odysseus battle-staunch 
With speed to Scyros overseas, by prayers 
Hither to bring Achilles' hero son: 
A light of victory shall he be to us." 

So spake wise Thestius' son, and all the folk 
Shouted for joy; for all their hearts and hopes 
Yearned to see Calchas' prophecy fulfilled. 
Then to the Argives spake Laertes' son: 
"Friends, it befits not to say many words 
This day to you, in sorrow's weariness. 
I know that wearied men can find no joy 
In speech or song, though the Pierides, 
The immortal Muses, love it. At such time 
Few words do men desire. But now, this thing 
That pleaseth all the Achaean host, will I 
Accomplish, so Tydeides fare with me; 
For, if we twain go, we shall surely bring, 
Won by our words, war-fain Achilles' son, 
Yea, though his mother, weeping sore, should strive 
Within her halls to keep him; for mine heart 
Trusts that he is a hero's valorous son." 

Then out spake Menelaus earnestly: 
"Odysseus, the strong Argives' help at need, 
If mighty-souled Achilles' valiant son 
From Scyros by thy suasion come to aid 
Us who yearn for him, and some Heavenly One 
Grant victory to our prayers, and I win home 
To Hellas, I will give to him to wife 
My noble child Hermione, with gifts 
Many and goodly for her marriage-dower 
With a glad heart. I trow he shall not scorn 
Either his bride or high-born sire-in-law." 

With a great shout the Danaans hailed his words. 
Then was the throng dispersed, and to the ships 
They scattered hungering for the morning meat 
Which strengtheneth man's heart. So when they ceased 
From eating, and desire was satisfied, 
Then with the wise Odysseus Tydeus' son 
Drew down a swift ship to the boundless sea, 
And victual and all tackling cast therein. 
Then stepped they aboard, and with them twenty men, 
Men skilled to row when winds were contrary, 
Or when the unrippled sea slept 'neath a calm. 
They smote the brine, and flashed the boiling foam: 
On leapt the ship; a watery way was cleft 
About the oars that sweating rowers tugged. 
As when hard-toiling oxen, 'neath the yoke 
Straining, drag on a massy-timbered wain, 
While creaks the circling axle 'neath its load, 
And from their weary necks and shoulders streams 
Down to the ground the sweat abundantly; 
So at the stiff oars toiled those stalwart men, 
And fast they laid behind them leagues of sea. 
Gazed after them the Achaeans as they went, 
Then turned to whet their deadly darts and spears, 
The weapons of their warfare. In their town 
The aweless Trojans armed themselves the while 
War-eager, praying to the Gods to grant 
Respite from slaughter, breathing-space from toil. 

To these, while sorely thus they yearned, the Gods 
Brought present help in trouble, even the seed 
Of mighty Hercules, Eurypylus. 
A great host followed him, in battle skilled, 
All that by long Caicus' outflow dwelt, 
Full of triumphant trust in their strong spears. 
Round them rejoicing thronged the sons of Troy: 
As when tame geese within a pen gaze up 
On him who casts them corn, and round his feet 
Throng hissing uncouth love, and his heart warms 
As he looks down on them; so thronged the sons 
Of Troy, as on fierce-heart Eurypylus 
They gazed; and gladdened was his aweless soul 
To see those throngs: from porchways women looked 
Wide-eyed with wonder on the godlike man. 
Above all men he towered as on he strode, 
As looks a lion when amid the hills 
He comes on jackals. Paris welcomed him, 
As Hector honouring him, his cousin he, 
Being of one blood with him, who was born Of 
Astyoche, King Priam's sister fair 
Whom Telephus embraced in his strong arms, 
Telephus, whom to aweless Hercules 
Auge the bright-haired bare in secret love. 
That babe, a suckling craving for the breast, 
A swift hind fostered, giving him the teat 
As to her own fawn in all love; for Zeus 
So willed it, in whose eyes it was not meet 
That Hercules' child should perish wretchedly. 
His glorious son with glad heart Paris led 
Unto his palace through the wide-wayed burg 
Beside Assaracus' tomb and stately halls 
Of Hector, and Tritonis' holy fane. 
Hard by his mansion stood, and therebeside 
The stainless altar of Home-warder Zeus 
Rose. As they went, he lovingly questioned him 
Of brethren, parents, and of marriage-kin; 
And all he craved to know Eurypylus told. 
So communed they, on-pacing side by side. 
Then came they to a palace great and rich: 
There goddess-like sat Helen, clothed upon 
With beauty of the Graces. Maidens four 
About her plied their tasks: others apart 
Within that goodly bower wrought the works 
Beseeming handmaids. Helen marvelling gazed 
Upon Eurypylus, on Helen he. 
Then these in converse each with other spake 
In that all-odorous bower. The handmaids brought 
And set beside their lady high-seats twain; 
And Paris sat him down, and at his side 
Eurypylus. That hero's host encamped 
Without the city, where the Trojan guards 
Kept watch. Their armour laid they on the earth; 
Their steeds, yet breathing battle, stood thereby, 
And cribs were heaped with horses' provender. 

Upfloated night, and darkened earth and air; 
Then feasted they before that cliff-like wall, 
Ceteian men and Trojans: babel of talk 
Rose from the feasters: all around the glow 
Of blazing campfires lighted up the tents: 
Pealed out the pipe's sweet voice, and hautboys rang 
With their clear-shrilling reeds; the witching strain 
Of lyres was rippling round. From far away 
The Argives gazed and marvelled, seeing the plain 
Aglare with many fires, and hearing notes 
Of flutes and lyres, neighing of chariot-steeds 
And pipes, the shepherd's and the banquet's joy. 
Therefore they bade their fellows each in turn 
Keep watch and ward about the tents till dawn, 
Lest those proud Trojans feasting by their walls 
Should fall on them, and set the ships aflame. 

Within the halls of Paris all this while 
With kings and princes Telephus' hero son 
Feasted; and Priam and the sons of Troy 
Each after each prayed him to play the man 
Against the Argives, and in bitter doom 
To lay them low; and blithe he promised all. 
So when they had supped, each hied him to his home; 
But there Eurypylus laid him down to rest 
Full nigh the feast-hall, in the stately bower 
Where Paris theretofore himself had slept 
With Helen world-renowned. A bower it was 
Most wondrous fair, the goodliest of them all. 
There lay he down; but otherwhere their rest 
Took they, till rose the bright-throned Queen of Morn. 
Up sprang with dawn the son of Telephus, 
And passed to the host with all those other kings 
In Troy abiding. Straightway did the folk 
All battle-eager don their warrior-gear, 
Burning to strike in forefront of the fight. 
And now Eurypylus clad his mighty limbs 
In armour that like levin-flashes gleamed; 
Upon his shield by cunning hands were wrought 
All the great labours of strong Hercules. 

Thereon were seen two serpents flickering 
Black tongues from grimly jaws: they seemed in act 
To dart; but Hercules' hands to right and left -- 
Albeit a babe's hands -- now were throttling them; 
For aweless was his spirit. As Zeus' strength 
From the beginning was his strength. The seed 
Of Heaven-abiders never deedless is 
Nor helpless, but hath boundless prowess, yea, 
Even when in the womb unborn it lies. 

Nemea's mighty lion there was seen 
Strangled in the strong arms of Hercules, 
His grim jaws dashed about with bloody foam: 
He seemed in verity gasping out his life. 

Thereby was wrought the Hydra many-necked 
Flickering its dread tongues. Of its fearful heads 
Some severed lay on earth, but many more 
Were budding from its necks, while Hercules 
And Iolaus, dauntless-hearted twain, 
Toiled hard; the one with lightning sickle-sweeps 
Lopped the fierce heads, his fellow seared each neck 
With glowing iron; the monster so was slain. 

Thereby was wrought the mighty tameless Boar 
With foaming jaws; real seemed the pictured thing, 
As by Aleides' giant strength the brute 
Was to Eurystheus living borne on high. 

There fashioned was the fleetfoot stag which laid 
The vineyards waste of hapless husbandmen. 
The Hero's hands held fast its golden horns, 
The while it snorted breath of ravening fire. 

Thereon were seen the fierce Stymphalian Birds, 
Some arrow-smitten dying in the dust, 
Some through the grey air darting in swift flight. 
At this, at that one -- hot in haste he seemed -- 
Hercules sped the arrows of his wrath. 

Augeias' monstrous stable there was wrought 
With cunning craft on that invincible targe; 
And Hercules was turning through the same 
The deep flow of Alpheius' stream divine, 
While wondering Nymphs looked down on every hand 
Upon that mighty work. Elsewhere portrayed 
Was the Fire-breathing Bull: the Hero's grip 
On his strong horns wrenched round the massive neck: 
The straining muscles on his arm stood out: 
The huge beast seemed to bellow. Next thereto 
Wrought on the shield was one in beauty arrayed 
As of a Goddess, even Hippolyta. 
The hero by the hair was dragging her 
From her swift steed, with fierce resolve to wrest 
With his strong hands the Girdle Marvellous 
From the Amazon Queen, while quailing shrank away 
The Maids of War. There in the Thracian land 
Were Diomedes' grim man-eating steeds: 
These at their gruesome mangers had he slain, 
And dead they lay with their fiend-hearted lord. 

There lay the bulk of giant Geryon 
Dead mid his kine. His gory heads were cast 
In dust, dashed down by that resistless club. 
Before him slain lay that most murderous hound 
Orthros, in furious might like Cerberus 
His brother-hound: a herdman lay thereby, 
Eurytion, all bedabbled with his blood. 

There were the Golden Apples wrought, that gleamed 
In the Hesperides' garden undefiled: 
All round the fearful Serpent's dead coils lay, 
And shrank the Maids aghast from Zeus' bold son. 

And there, a dread sight even for Gods to see, 
Was Cerberus, whom the Loathly Worm had borne 
To Typho in a craggy cavern's gloom 
Close on the borders of Eternal Night, 
A hideous monster, warder of the Gate 
Of Hades, Home of Wailing, jailer-hound 
Of dead folk in the shadowy Gulf of Doom. 
But lightly Zeus' son with his crashing blows 
Tamed him, and haled him from the cataract flood 
Of Styx, with heavy-drooping head, and dragged 
The Dog sore loth to the strange upper air 
All dauntlessly. And there, at the world's end, 
Were Caucasus' long glens, where Hercules, 
Rending Prometheus' chains, and hurling them 
This way and that with fragments of the rock 
Whereinto they were riveted, set free 
The mighty Titan. Arrow-smitten lay 
The Eagle of the Torment therebeside. 

There stormed the wild rout of the Centaurs round 
The hall of Pholus: goaded on by Strife 
And wine, with Hercules the monsters fought. 
Amidst the pine-trunks stricken to death they lay 
Still grasping those strange weapons in dead hands, 
While some with stems long-shafted still fought on 
In fury, and refrained not from the strife; 
And all their heads, gashed in the pitiless fight, 
Were drenched with gore -- the whole scene seemed to live --

With blood the wine was mingled: meats and bowls 
And tables in one ruin shattered lay. 

There by Evenus' torrent, in fierce wrath 
For his sweet bride, he laid with the arrow low 
Nessus in mid-flight. There withal was wrought 
Antaeus' brawny strength, who challenged him 
To wrestling-strife; he in those sinewy arms 
Raised high above the earth, was crushed to death. 

There where swift Hellespont meets the outer sea, 
Lay the sea-monster slain by his ruthless shafts, 
While from Hesione he rent her chains. 

Of bold Alcides many a deed beside 
Shone on the broad shield of Eurypylus. 
He seemed the War-god, as from rank to rank 
He sped; rejoiced the Trojans following him, 
Seeing his arms, and him clothed with the might 
Of Gods; and Paris hailed him to the fray: 
"Glad am I for thy coming, for mine heart 
Trusts that the Argives all shall wretchedly 
Be with their ships destroyed; for such a man 
Mid Greeks or Trojans never have I seen. 
Now, by the strength and fury of Hercules -- 
To whom in stature, might, and goodlihead 
Most like thou art I pray thee, have in mind 
Him, and resolve to match his deeds with thine. 
Be the strong shield of Trojans hard-bestead: 
Win us a breathing-space. Thou only, I trow, 
From perishing Troy canst thrust the dark doom back." 

With kindling words he spake. That hero cried: 
"Great-hearted Paris, like the Blessed Ones 
In goodlihead, this lieth foreordained 
On the Gods' knees, who in the fight shall fall, 
And who outlive it. I, as honour bids, 
And as my strength sufficeth, will not flinch 
From Troy's defence. I swear to turn from fight 
Never, except in victory or death." 

Gallantly spake he: with exceeding joy 
Rejoiced the Trojans. Champions then he chose, 
Alexander and Aeneas fiery-souled, 
Polydamas, Pammon, and Deiphobus, 
And Aethicus, of Paphlagonian men 
The staunchest man to stem the tide of war; 
These chose he, cunning all in battle-toil, 
To meet the foe in forefront of the fight. 
Swiftly they strode before that warrior-throng 
Then from the city cheering charged. The host 
Followed them in their thousands, as when bees 
Follow by bands their leaders from the hives, 
With loud hum on a spring day pouring forth. 
So to the fight the warriors followed these; 
And, as they charged, the thunder-tramp of men 
And steeds, and clang of armour, rang to heaven. 
As when a rushing mighty wind stirs up 
The barren sea-plain from its nethermost floor, 
And darkling to the strand roll roaring waves 
Belching sea-tangle from the bursting surf, 
And wild sounds rise from beaches harvestless; 
So, as they charged, the wide earth rang again. 

Now from their rampart forth the Argives poured 
Round godlike Agamemnon. Rang their shouts 
Cheering each other on to face the fight, 
And not to cower beside the ships in dread 
Of onset-shouts of battle-eager foes. 
They met those charging hosts with hearts as light 
As calves bear, when they leap to meet the kine 
Down faring from hill-pastures in the spring 
Unto the steading, when the fields are green 
With corn-blades, when the earth is glad with flowers, 
And bowls are brimmed with milk of kine and ewes, 
And multitudinous lowing far and near 
Uprises as the mothers meet their young, 
And in their midst the herdman joys; so great 
Was the uproar that rose when met the fronts 
Of battle: dread it rang on either hand. 
Hard-strained was then the fight: incarnate 
Strife Stalked through the midst, with Slaughter ghastly-faced.

Crashed bull-hide shields, and spears, and helmet-crests

Meeting: the brass flashed out like leaping flames. 
Bristled the battle with the lances; earth 
Ran red with blood, as slaughtered heroes fell 
And horses, mid a tangle of shattered ears, 
Some yet with spear-wounds gasping, while on them 
Others were falling. Through the air upshrieked 
An awful indistinguishable roar; 
For on both hosts fell iron-hearted Strife. 
Here were men hurling cruel jagged stones, 
There speeding arrows and new-whetted darts, 
There with the axe or twibill hewing hard, 
Slashing with swords, and thrusting out with spears: 
Their mad hands clutched all manner of tools of death. 

At first the Argives bore the ranks of Troy 
Backward a little; but they rallied, charged, 
Leapt on the foe, and drenched the field with blood. 
Like a black hurricane rushed Eurypylus 
Cheering his men on, hewing Argives down 
Awelessly: measureless might was lent to him 
By Zeus, for a grace to glorious Hercules. 
Nireus, a man in beauty like the Gods, 
His spear long-shafted stabbed beneath the ribs, 
Down on the plain he fell, forth streamed the blood 
Drenching his splendid arms, drenching the form 
Glorious of mould, and his thick-clustering hair. 
There mid the slain in dust and blood he lay, 
Like a young lusty olive-sapling, which 
A river rushing down in roaring flood, 
Tearing its banks away, and cleaving wide 
A chasm-channel, hath disrooted; low 
It lieth heavy-blossomed; so lay then 
The goodly form, the grace of loveliness 
Of Nireus on earth's breast. But o'er the slain 
Loud rang the taunting of Eurypylus: 
"Lie there in dust! Thy beauty marvellous 
Naught hath availed thee! I have plucked thee away 
From life, to which thou wast so fain to cling. 
Rash fool, who didst defy a mightier man 
Unknowing! Beauty is no match for strength!" 

He spake, and leapt upon the slain to strip 
His goodly arms: but now against him came 
Machaon wroth for Nireus, by his side 
Doom-overtaken. With his spear he drave 
At his right shoulder: strong albeit he was, 
He touched him, and blood spurted from the gash. 
Yet, ere he might leap back from grapple of death, 
Even as a lion or fierce mountain-boar 
Maddens mid thronging huntsmen, furious-fain 
To rend the man whose hand first wounded him; 
So fierce Eurypylus on Machaon rushed. 
The long lance shot out swiftly, and pierced him through

On the right haunch; yet would he not give back, 
Nor flinch from the onset, fast though flowed the blood.

In haste he snatched a huge stone from the ground, 
And dashed it on the head of Telephus' son; 
But his helm warded him from death or harm 
Then waxed Eurypylus more hotly wroth 
With that strong warrior, and in fury of soul 
Clear through Machaon's breast he drave his spear, 
And through the midriff passed the gory point. 
He fell, as falls beneath a lion's jaws 
A bull, and round him clashed his glancing arms. 
Swiftly Eurypylus plucked the lance of death 
Out of the wound, and vaunting cried aloud: 
"Wretch, wisdom was not bound up in thine heart, 
That thou, a weakling, didst come forth to fight 
A mightier. Therefore art thou in the toils 
Of Doom. Much profit shall be thine, when kites 
Devour the flesh of thee in battle slain! 
Ha, dost thou hope still to return, to 'scape 
Mine hands? A leech art thou, and soothing salves 
Thou knowest, and by these didst haply hope 
To flee the evil day! Not thine own sire, 
On the wind's wings descending from Olympus, 
Should save thy life, not though between thy lips 
He should pour nectar and ambrosia!" 

Faint-breathing answered him the dying man: 
"Eurypylus, thine own weird is to live 
Not long: Fate is at point to meet thee here 
On Troy's plain, and to still thine impious tongue." 

So passed his spirit into Hades' halls. 
Then to the dead man spake his conqueror: 
"Now on the earth lie thou. What shall betide 
Hereafter, care I not -- yea, though this day 
Death's doom stand by my feet: no man may live 
For ever: each man's fate is foreordained." 

Stabbing the corpse he spake. Then shouted loud 
Teucer, at seeing Machaon in the dust. 
Far thence he stood hard-toiling in the fight, 
For on the centre sore the battle lay: 
Foe after foe pressed on; yet not for this 
Was Teucer heedless of the fallen brave, 
Neither of Nireus lying hard thereby 
Behind Machaon in the dust. He saw, 

And with a great voice raised the rescue-cry: 
"Charge, Argives! Flinch not from the charging foe! 
For shame unspeakable shall cover us 
If Trojan men hale back to Ilium 
Noble Machaon and Nireus godlike-fair. 
Come, with a good heart let us face the foe 
To rescue these slain friends, or fall ourselves 
Beside them. Duty bids that men defend 
Friends, and to aliens leave them not a prey, 
Not without sweat of toil is glory won!" 

Then were the Danaans anguish-stung: the earth 
All round them dyed they red with blood of slain, 
As foe fought foe in even-balanced fight. 
By this to Podaleirius tidings came 
How that in dust his brother lay, struck down 
By woeful death. Beside the ships he sat 
Ministering to the hurts of men with spears 
Stricken. In wrath for his brother's sake he rose, 
He clad him in his armour; in his breast 
Dread battle-prowess swelled. For conflict grim 
He panted: boiled the mad blood round his heart 
He leapt amidst the foemen; his swift hands 
Swung the snake-headed javelin up, and hurled, 
And slew with its winged speed Agamestor's son 
Cleitus, a bright-haired Nymph had given him birth 
Beside Parthenius, whose quiet stream 
Fleets smooth as oil through green lands, till it pours 
Its shining ripples to the Euxine sea. 
Then by his warrior-brother laid he low 
Lassus, whom Pronoe, fair as a goddess, bare 
Beside Nymphaeus' stream, hard by a cave, 
A wide and wondrous cave: sacred it is 
Men say, unto the Nymphs, even all that haunt 
The long-ridged Paphlagonian hills, and all 
That by full-clustered Heracleia dwell. 
That cave is like the work of gods, of stone 
In manner marvellous moulded: through it flows 
Cold water crystal-clear: in niches round 
Stand bowls of stone upon the rugged rock, 
Seeming as they were wrought by carvers' hands. 
Statues of Wood-gods stand around, fair Nymphs, 
Looms, distaffs, all such things as mortal craft 
Fashioneth. Wondrous seem they unto men 
Which pass into that hallowed cave. It hath, 
Up-leading and down-leading, doorways twain, 
Facing, the one, the wild North's shrilling blasts, 
And one the dank rain-burdened South. By this 
Do mortals pass beneath the Nymphs' wide cave; 
But that is the Immortals' path: no man 
May tread it, for a chasm deep and wide 
Down-reaching unto Hades, yawns between. 
This track the Blest Gods may alone behold. 
So died a host on either side that warred 
Over Machaon and Aglaia's son. 
But at the last through desperate wrestle of fight 
The Danaans rescued them: yet few were they 
Which bare them to the ships: by bitter stress 
Of conflict were the more part compassed round, 
And needs must still abide the battle's brunt. 
But when full many had filled the measure up 
Of fate, mid tumult, blood and agony, 
Then to their ships did many Argives flee 
Pressed by Eurypylus hard, an avalanche 
Of havoc. Yet a few abode the strife 
Round Aias and the Atreidae rallying; 
And haply these had perished all, beset 
By throngs on throngs of foes on every hand, 
Had not Oileus' son stabbed with his spear 
'Twixt shoulder and breast war-wise Polydamas; 
Forth gushed the blood, and he recoiled a space. 
Then Menelaus pierced Deiphobus 
By the right breast, that with swift feet he fled. 
And many of that slaughter-breathing throng 
Were slain by Agamemnon: furiously 
He rushed on godlike Aethicus with the spear; 
But he shrank from the forefront back mid friends. 

Now when Eurypylus the battle-stay 
Marked how the ranks of Troy gave back from fight, 
He turned him from the host that he had chased 
Even to the ships, and rushed with eagle-swoop 
On Atreus' strong sons and Oileus' seed 
Stout-hearted, who was passing fleet of foot 
And in fight peerless. Swiftly he charged on these 
Grasping his spear long-shafted: at Iris side 
Charged Paris, charged Aeneas stout of heart, 
Who hurled a stone exceeding huge, that crashed 
On Aias' helmet: dashed to the dust he was, 
Yet gave not up the ghost, whose day of doom 
Was fate-ordained amidst Caphaerus' rocks 
On the home-voyage. Now his valiant men 
Out of the foes' hands snatched him, bare him thence, 
Scarce drawing breath, to the Achaean ships. 
And now the Atreid kings, the war-renowned, 
Were left alone, and murder-breathing foes 
Encompassed them, and hurled from every side 
Whate'er their hands might find the deadly shaft 
Some showered, some the stone, the javelin some. 
They in the midst aye turned this way and that, 
As boars or lions compassed round with pales 
On that day when kings gather to the sport 
The people, and have penned the mighty beasts 
Within the toils of death; but these, although 
With walls ringed round, yet tear with tusk and fang 
What luckless thrall soever draweth near. 
So these death-compassed heroes slew their foes 
Ever as they pressed on. Yet had their might 
Availed not for defence, for all their will, 
Had Teucer and Idomeneus strong of heart 
Come not to help, with Thoas, Meriones, 
And godlike Thrasymedes, they which shrank 
Erewhile before Eurypylus yea, had fled 
Unto the ships to 'scape the crushing doom, 
But that, in fear for Atreus' sons, they rallied 
Against Eurypylus: deadly waxed the fight. 

Then Teucer with a mighty spear-thrust smote 
Aeneas' shield, yet wounded not his flesh, 
For the great fourfold buckler warded him; 
Yet feared he, and recoiled a little space. 
Leapt Meriones upon Laophoon 
The son of Paeon, born by Axius' flood 
Of bright-haired Cleomede. Unto Troy 
With noble Asteropaeus had he come 
To aid her folk: him Meriones' keen spear 
Stabbed 'neath the navel, and the lance-head tore 
His bowels forth; swift sped his soul away 
Into the Shadow-land. Alcimedes, 
The warrior-friend of Aias, Oileus' son, 
Shot mid the press of Trojans; for he sped 
With taunting shout a sharp stone from a sling 
Into their battle's heart. They quailed in fear 
Before the hum and onrush of the bolt. 
Fate winged its flight to the bold charioteer 
Of Pammon, Hippasus' son: his brow it smote 
While yet he grasped the reins, and flung him stunned 
Down from the chariot-seat before the wheels. 
The rushing war-wain whirled his wretched form 
'Twixt tyres and heels of onward-leaping steeds, 
And awful death in that hour swallowed him 
When whip and reins had flown from his nerveless hands. 
Then grief thrilled Pammon: hard necessity 
Made him both chariot-lord and charioteer. 
Now to his doom and death-day had he bowed, 
Had not a Trojan through that gory strife 
Leapt, grasped the reins, and saved the prince, when now

His strength failed 'neath the murderous hands of foes. 

As godlike Acamas charged, the stalwart son 
Of Nestor thrust the spear above his knee, 
And with that wound sore anguish came on him: 
Back from the fight he drew; the deadly strife 
He left unto his comrades: quenched was now 
His battle-lust. Eurypylus' henchman smote 
Echemmon, Thoas' friend, amidst the fray 
Beneath the shoulder: nigh his heart the spear 
Passed bitter-biting: o'er his limbs brake out 
Mingled with blood cold sweat of agony. 
He turned to flee; Eurypylus' giant might 
Chased, caught him, shearing his heel-tendons through: 
There, where the blow fell, his reluctant feet 
Stayed, and the spirit left his mortal frame. 
Thoas pricked Paris with quick-thrusting spear 
On the right thigh: backward a space he ran 
For his death-speeding bow, which had been left 
To rearward of the fight. Idomeneus 
Upheaved a stone, huge as his hands could swing, 
And dashed it on Eurypylus' arm: to earth 
Fell his death-dealing spear. Backward he stepped 
To grasp another, since from out his hand 
The first was smitten. So had Atreus' sons 
A moment's breathing-space from stress of war. 
But swiftly drew Eurypylus' henchmen near 
Bearing a stubborn-shafted lance, wherewith 
He brake the strength of many. In stormy might 
Then charged he on the foe: whomso he met 
He slew, and spread wide havoc through their ranks. 

Now neither Atreus' sons might steadfast stand, 
Nor any valiant Danaan beside, 
For ruinous panic suddenly gripped the hearts 
Of all; for on them all Eurypylus rushed 
Flashing death in their faces, chased them, slew, 
Cried to the Trojans and to his chariot-lords: 
"Friends, be of good heart! To these Danaans 
Let us deal slaughter and doom's darkness now! 
Lo, how like scared sheep back to the ships they flee! 
Forget not your death-dealing battle-lore, 
O ye that from your youth are men of war!" 

Then charged they on the Argives as one man; 
And these in utter panic turned and fled 
The bitter battle, those hard after them 
Followed, as white-fanged hounds hold deer in chase 
Up the long forest-glens. Full many in dust 
They dashed down, howsoe'er they longed to escape. 
The slaughter grim and great of that wild fray. 
Eurypylus hath slain Bucolion, 
Nesus, and Chromion and Antiphus; 
Twain in Mycenae dwelt, a goodly land; 
In Lacedaemon twain. Men of renown 
Albeit they were, he slew them. Then he smote 
A host unnumbered of the common throng. 
My strength should not suffice to sing their fate, 
How fain soever, though within my breast 
Were iron lungs. Aeneas slew withal 
Antimachus and Pheres, twain which left 
Crete with Idomeneus. Agenor smote 
Molus the princely, -- with king Sthenelus 
He came from Argos, -- hurled from far behind 
A dart new-whetted, as he fled from fight, 
Piercing his right leg, and the eager shaft 
Cut sheer through the broad sinew, shattering 
The bones with anguished pain: and so his doom 
Met him, to die a death of agony. 
Then Paris' arrows laid proud Phorcys low, 
And Mosynus, brethren both, from Salamis 
Who came in Aias' ships, and nevermore 
Saw the home-land. Cleolaus smote he next, 
Meges' stout henchman; for the arrow struck 
His left breast: deadly night enwrapped him round, 
And his soul fleeted forth: his fainting heart 
Still in his breast fluttering convulsively 
Made the winged arrow shiver. Yet again 
Did Paris shoot at bold Eetion. 
Through his jaw leapt the sudden-flashing brass: 
He groaned, and with his blood were mingled tears. 
So ever man slew man, till all the space 
Was heaped with Argives each on other cast. 
Now had the Trojans burnt with fire the ships, 
Had not night, trailing heavy-folded mist, 
Uprisen. So Eurypylus drew back, 
And Troy's sons with him, from the ships aloof 
A little space, by Simois' outfall; there 
Camped they exultant. But amidst the ships 
Flung down upon the sands the Argives wailed 
Heart-anguished for the slain, so many of whom 
Dark fate had overtaken and laid in dust. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VII

How the Son of Achilles Was Brought To the War from the Isle of Scyros

When heaven hid his stars, and Dawn awoke 
Outspraying splendour, and night's darkness fled, 
Then undismayed the Argives' warrior-sons 
Marched forth without the ships to meet in fight 
Eurypylus, save those that tarried still 
To render to Machaon midst the ships 
Death-dues, with Nireus -- Nireus, who in grace 
And goodlihead was like the Deathless Ones, 
Yet was not strong in bodily might: the Gods 
Grant not perfection in all things to men; 
But evil still is blended with the good 
By some strange fate: to Nireus' winsome grace 
Was linked a weakling's prowess. Yet the Greeks 
Slighted him not, but gave him all death-dues, 
And mourned above his grave with no less grief 
Than for Machaon, whom they honoured aye, 
For his deep wisdom, as the immortal Gods. 
One mound they swiftly heaped above these twain. 

Then in the plain once more did murderous war 
Madden: the multitudinous clash and cry 
Rose, as the shields were shattered with huge stones, 
Were pierced with lances. So they toiled in fight; 
But all this while lay Podaleirius 
Fasting in dust and groaning, leaving not 
His brother's tomb; and oft his heart was moved 
With his own hands to slay himself. And now 
He clutched his sword, and now amidst his herbs 
Sought for a deadly drug; and still his friends 
Essayed to stay his hand and comfort him 
With many pleadings. But he would not cease 
From grieving: yea, his hands had spilt his life 
There on his noble brother's new-made tomb, 
But Nestor heard thereof, and sorrowed sore 
In his affliction, and he came on him 
As now he flung him on that woeful grave, 
And now was casting dust upon his head, 
Beating his breast, and on his brother's name 
Crying, while thralls and comrades round their lord 
Groaned, and affliction held them one and all. 
Then gently spake he to that stricken one: 
"Refrain from bitter moan and deadly grief, 
My son. It is not for a wise man's honour 
To wail, as doth a woman, o'er the fallen. 
Thou shalt not bring him up to light again 
Whose soul hath fleeted vanishing into air, 
Whose body fire hath ravined up, whose bones 
Earth has received. His end was worthy his life. 
Endure thy sore grief, even as I endured, 
Who lost a son, slain by the hands of foes, 
A son not worse than thy Machaon, good 
With spears in battle, good in counsel. None 
Of all the youths so loved his sire as he 
Loved me. He died for me yea, died to save 
His father. Yet, when he was slain, did I 
Endure to taste food, and to see the light, 
Well knowing that all men must tread one path 
Hades-ward, and before all lies one goal, 
Death's mournful goal. A mortal man must bear 
All joys, all griefs, that God vouchsafes to send." 

Made answer that heart-stricken one, while still 
Wet were his cheeks with ever-flowing tears: 
"Father, mine heart is bowed 'neath crushing grief 
For a brother passing wise, who fostered me 
Even as a son. When to the heavens had passed 
Our father, in his arms he cradled me: 
Gladly he taught me all his healing lore; 
We shared one table; in one bed we lay: 
We had all things in common these, and love. 
My grief cannot forget, nor I desire, 
Now he is dead, to see the light of life." 

Then spake the old man to that stricken one: 
"To all men Fate assigns one same sad lot, 
Bereavement: earth shall cover all alike, 
Albeit we tread not the same path of life, 
And none the path he chooseth; for on high 
Good things and bad lie on the knees of 
Gods Unnumbered, indistinguishably blent. 
These no Immortal seeth; they are veiled 
In mystic cloud-folds. Only Fate puts forth 
Her hands thereto, nor looks at what she takes, 
But casts them from Olympus down to earth. 
This way and that they are wafted, as it were 
By gusts of wind. The good man oft is whelmed 
In suffering: wealth undeserved is heaped 
On the vile person. Blind is each man's life; 
Therefore he never walketh surely; oft 
He stumbleth: ever devious is his path, 
Now sloping down to sorrow, mounting now 
To bliss. All-happy is no living man 
From the beginning to the end, but still 
The good and evil clash. Our life is short; 
Beseems not then in grief to live. Hope on, 
Still hope for better days: chain not to woe 
Thine heart. There is a saying among men 
That to the heavens unperishing mount the souls 
Of good men, and to nether darkness sink 
Souls of the wicked. Both to God and man 
Dear was thy brother, good to brother-men, 
And son of an Immortal. Sure am I 
That to the company of Gods shall he 
Ascend, by intercession of thy sire." 

Then raised he that reluctant mourner up 
With comfortable words. From that dark grave 
He drew him, backward gazing oft with groans. 
To the ships they came, where Greeks and Trojan men 
Had bitter travail of rekindled war. 

Eurypylus there, in dauntless spirit like 
The War-god, with mad-raging spear and hands 
Resistless, smote down hosts of foes: the earth 
Was clogged with dead men slain on either side. 
On strode he midst the corpses, awelessly 
He fought, with blood-bespattered hands and feet; 
Never a moment from grim strife he ceased. 
Peneleos the mighty-hearted came 
Against him in the pitiless fray: he fell 
Before Eurypylus' spear: yea, many more 
Fell round him. Ceased not those destroying hands, 
But wrathful on the Argives still he pressed, 
As when of old on Pholoe's long-ridged heights 
Upon the Centaurs terrible Hercules rushed 
Storming in might, and slew them, passing-swift 
And strong and battle-cunning though they were; 
So rushed he on, so smote he down the array, 
One after other, of the Danaan spears. 
Heaps upon heaps, here, there, in throngs they fell 
Strewn in the dust. As when a river in flood 
Comes thundering down, banks crumble on either side 
To drifting sand: on seaward rolls the surge 
Tossing wild crests, while cliffs on every hand 
Ring crashing echoes, as their brows break down 
Beneath long-leaping roaring waterfalls, 
And dikes are swept away; so fell in dust 
The war-famed Argives by Eurypylus slain, 
Such as he overtook in that red rout. 
Some few escaped, whom strength of fleeing feet 
Delivered. Yet in that sore strait they drew 
Peneleos from the shrieking tumult forth, 
And bare to the ships, though with swift feet themselves

Were fleeing from ghastly death, from pitiless doom. 
Behind the rampart of the ships they fled 
In huddled rout: they had no heart to stand 
Before Eurypylus, for Hercules, 
To crown with glory his son's stalwart son, 
Thrilled them with panic. There behind their wall 
They cowered, as goats to leeward of a hill 
Shrink from the wild cold rushing of the wind 
That bringeth snow and heavy sleet and haft. 
No longing for the pasture tempteth them 
Over the brow to step, and face the blast, 
But huddling screened by rock-wall and ravine 
They abide the storm, and crop the scanty grass 
Under dim copses thronging, till the gusts 
Of that ill wind shall lull: so, by their towers 
Screened, did the trembling Danaans abide 
Telephus' mighty son. Yea, he had burnt 
The ships, and all that host had he destroyed, 
Had not Athena at the last inspired 
The Argive men with courage. Ceaselessly 
From the high rampart hurled they at the foe 
With bitter-biting darts, and slew them fast; 
And all the walls were splashed with reeking gore, 
And aye went up a moan of smitten men. 

So fought they: nightlong, daylong fought they on, 
Ceteians, Trojans, battle-biding Greeks, 
Fought, now before the ships, and now again 
Round the steep wall, with fury unutterable. 
Yet even so for two days did they cease 
From murderous fight; for to Eurypylus came 
A Danaan embassage, saying, "From the war 
Forbear we, while we give unto the flames 
The battle-slain." So hearkened he to them: 
From ruin-wreaking strife forebore the hosts; 
And so their dead they buried, who in dust 
Had fallen. Chiefly the Achaeans mourned 
Peneleos; o'er the mighty dead they heaped 
A barrow broad and high, a sign for men 
Of days to be. But in a several place 
The multitude of heroes slain they laid, 
Mourning with stricken hearts. On one great pyre 
They burnt them all, and buried in one grave. 
So likewise far from thence the sons of Troy 
Buried their slain. Yet murderous Strife slept not, 
But roused again Eurypylus' dauntless might 
To meet the foe. He turned not from the ships, 
But there abode, and fanned the fury of war. 

Meanwhile the black ship on to Scyros ran; 
And those twain found before his palace-gate 
Achilles' son, now hurling dart and lance, 
Now in his chariot driving fleetfoot steeds. 
Glad were they to behold him practising 
The deeds of war, albeit his heart was sad 
For his slain sire, of whom had tidings come 
Ere this. With reverent eyes of awe they went 
To meet him, for that goodly form and face 
Seemed even as very Achilles unto them. 
But he, or ever they had spoken, cried: 
"All hail, ye strangers, unto this mine home 
Say whence ye are, and who, and what the need 
That hither brings you over barren seas." 

So spake he, and Odysseus answered him: 
"Friends are we of Achilles lord of war, 
To whom of Deidameia thou wast born -- 
Yea, when we look on thee we seem to see 
That Hero's self; and like the Immortal Ones 
Was he. Of Ithaca am I: this man 
Of Argos, nurse of horses -- if perchance 
Thou hast heard the name of Tydeus' warrior son 
Or of the wise Odysseus. Lo, I stand 
Before thee, sent by voice of prophecy. 
I pray thee, pity us: come thou to Troy 
And help us. Only so unto the war 
An end shall be. Gifts beyond words to thee 
The Achaean kings shall give: yea, I myself 
Will give to thee thy godlike father's arms, 
And great shall be thy joy in bearing them; 
For these be like no mortal's battle-gear, 
But splendid as the very War-god's arms. 
Over their marvellous blazonry hath gold 
Been lavished; yea, in heaven Hephaestus' self 
Rejoiced in fashioning that work divine, 
The which thine eyes shall marvel to behold; 
For earth and heaven and sea upon the shield 
Are wrought, and in its wondrous compass are 
Creatures that seem to live and move -- a wonder 
Even to the Immortals. Never man 
Hath seen their like, nor any man hath worn, 
Save thy sire only, whom the Achaeans all 
Honoured as Zeus himself. I chiefliest 
From mine heart loved him, and when he was slain, 
To many a foe I dealt a ruthless doom, 
And through them all bare back to the ships his corse. 
Therefore his glorious arms did Thetis give 
To me. These, though I prize them well, to thee 
Will I give gladly when thou com'st to Troy. 
Yea also, when we have smitten Priam's towns 
And unto Hellas in our ships return, 
Shall Menelaus give thee, an thou wilt, 
His princess-child to wife, of love for thee, 
And with his bright-haired daughter shall bestow 
Rich dower of gold and treasure, even all 
That meet is to attend a wealthy king." 

So spake he, and replied Achilles' son: 
"If bidden of oracles the Achaean men 
Summon me, let us with to-morrow's dawn 
Fare forth upon the broad depths of the sea, 
If so to longing Danaans I may prove 
A light of help. Now pass we to mine halls, 
And to such guest-fare as befits to set 
Before the stranger. For my marriage-day -- 
To this the Gods in time to come shall see." 

Then hall-ward led he them, and with glad hearts 
They followed. To the forecourt when they came 
Of that great mansion, found they there the Queen 
Deidameia in her sorrow of soul 
Grief-wasted, as when snow from mountain-sides 
Before the sun and east-wind wastes away; 
So pined she for that princely hero slain. 
Then came to her amidst her grief the kings, 
And greeted her in courteous wise. Her son 
Drew near and told their lineage and their names; 
But that for which they came he left untold 
Until the morrow, lest unto her woe 
There should be added grief and floods of tears, 
And lest her prayers should hold him from the path 
Whereon his heart was set. Straight feasted these, 
And comforted their hearts with sleep, even all 
Which dwelt in sea-ringed Scyros, nightlong lulled 
By long low thunder of the girdling deep, 
Of waves Aegean breaking on her shores. 
But not on Deidameia fell the hands 
Of kindly sleep. She bore in mind the names 
Of crafty Odysseus and of Diomede 
The godlike, how these twain had widowed her 
Of battle-fain Achilles, how their words 
Had won his aweless heart to fare with them 
To meet the war-cry where stern Fate met him, 
Shattered his hope of home-return, and laid 
Measureless grief on Peleus and on her. 
Therefore an awful dread oppressed her soul 
Lest her son too to tumult of the war 
Should speed, and grief be added to her grief. 

Dawn climbed the wide-arched heaven, straightway they 
Rose from their beds. Then Deidameia knew; 
And on her son's broad breast she cast herself, 
And bitterly wailed: her cry thrilled through the air, 
As when a cow loud-lowing mid the hills 
Seeks through the glens her calf, and all around 
Echo long ridges of the mountain-steep; 
So on all sides from dim recesses rang 
The hall; and in her misery she cried: 
"Child, wherefore is thy soul now on the wing 
To follow strangers unto Ilium 
The fount of tears, where perish many in fight, 
Yea, cunning men in war and battle grim? 
And thou art but a youth, and hast not learnt 
The ways of war, which save men in the day 
Of peril. Hearken thou to me, abide 
Here in thine home, lest evil tidings come 
From Troy unto my ears, that thou in fight 
Hast perished; for mine heart saith, never thou 
Hitherward shalt from battle-toil return. 
Not even thy sire escaped the doom of death -- 
He, mightier than thou, mightier than all 
Heroes on earth, yea, and a Goddess' son -- 
But was in battle slain, all through the wiles 
And crafty counsels of these very men 
Who now to woeful war be kindling thee. 
Therefore mine heart is full of shuddering fear 
Lest, son, my lot should be to live bereaved 
Of thee, and to endure dishonour and pain, 
For never heavier blow on woman falls 
Than when her lord hath perished, and her sons 
Die also, and her house is left to her 
Desolate. Straightway evil men remove 
Her landmarks, yea, and rob her of her all, 
Setting the right at naught. There is no lot 
More woeful and more helpless than is hers 
Who is left a widow in a desolate home." 

Loud-wailing spake she; but her son replied: 
"Be of good cheer, my mother; put from thee 
Evil foreboding. No man is in war 
Beyond his destiny slain. If my weird be 
To die in my country's cause, then let me die 
When I have done deeds worthy of my sire." 

Then to his side old Lycomedes came, 
And to his battle-eager grandson spake: 
"O valiant-hearted son, so like thy sire, 
I know thee strong and valorous; yet, O yet 
For thee I fear the bitter war; I fear 
The terrible sea-surge. Shipmen evermore 
Hang on destruction's brink. Beware, my child, 
Perils of waters when thou sailest back 
From Troy or other shores, such as beset 
Full oftentimes the voyagers that ride 
The long sea-ridges, when the sun hath left 
The Archer-star, and meets the misty Goat, 
When the wild blasts drive on the lowering storm, 
Or when Orion to the darkling west 
Slopes, into Ocean's river sinking slow. 
Beware the time of equal days and nights, 
When blasts that o'er the sea's abysses rush, 
None knoweth whence in fury of battle clash. 
Beware the Pleiads' setting, when the sea 
Maddens beneath their power nor these alone, 
But other stars, terrors of hapless men, 
As o'er the wide sea-gulf they set or rise." 

Then kissed he him, nor sought to stay the feet 
Of him who panted for the clamour of war, 
Who smiled for pleasure and for eagerness 
To haste to the ship. Yet were his hurrying feet 
Stayed by his mother's pleading and her tears 
Still in those halls awhile. As some swift horse 
Is reined in by his rider, when he strains 
Unto the race-course, and he neighs, and champs 
The curbing bit, dashing his chest with foam, 
And his feet eager for the course are still 
Never, his restless hooves are clattering aye; 
His mane is a stormy cloud, he tosses high 
His head with snortings, and his lord is glad; 
So reined his mother back the glorious son 
Of battle-stay Achilles, so his feet 
Were restless, so the mother's loving pride 
Joyed in her son, despite her heart-sick pain. 

A thousand times he kissed her, then at last 
Left her alone with her own grief and moan 
There in her father's halls. As o'er her nest 
A swallow in her anguish cries aloud 
For her lost nestlings which, mid piteous shrieks, 
A fearful serpent hath devoured, and wrung 
The loving mother's heart; and now above 
That empty cradle spreads her wings, and now 
Flies round its porchway fashioned cunningly 
Lamenting piteously her little ones: 
So for her child Deidameia mourned. 
Now on her son's bed did she cast herself, 
Crying aloud, against his door-post now 
She leaned, and wept: now laid she in her lap 
Those childhood's toys yet treasured in her bower, 
Wherein his babe-heart joyed long years agone. 
She saw a dart there left behind of him, 
And kissed it o'er and o'er yea, whatso else 
Her weeping eyes beheld that was her son's. 

Naught heard he of her moans unutterable, 
But was afar, fast striding to the ship. 
He seemed, as his feet swiftly bare him on, 
Like some all-radiant star; and at his side 
With Tydeus' son war-wise Odysseus went, 
And with them twenty gallant-hearted men, 
Whom Deidameia chose as trustiest 
Of all her household, and unto her son 
Gave them for henchmen swift to do his will. 
And these attended Achilles' valiant son, 
As through the city to the ship he sped. 
On, with glad laughter, in their midst he strode; 
And Thetis and the Nereids joyed thereat. 
Yea, glad was even the Raven-haired, the Lord 
Of all the sea, beholding that brave son 
Of princely Achilles, marking how he longed 
For battle. Beardless boy albeit he was, 
His prowess and his might were inward spurs 
To him. He hasted forth his fatherland 
Like to the War-god, when to gory strife 
He speedeth, wroth with foes, when maddeneth 
His heart, and grim his frown is, and his eyes 
Flash levin-flame around him, and his face 
Is clothed with glory of beauty terror-blent, 
As on he rusheth: quail the very Gods. 
So seemed Achilles' goodly son; and prayers 
Went up through all the city unto Heaven 
To bring their noble prince safe back from war; 
And the Gods hearkened to them. High he towered 
Above all stateliest men which followed him. 

So came they to the heavy-plunging sea, 
And found the rowers in the smooth-wrought ship 
Handling the tackle, fixing mast and sail. 
Straightway they went aboard: the shipmen cast 
The hawsers loose, and heaved the anchor-stones, 
The strength and stay of ships in time of need. 
Then did the Sea-queen's lord grant voyage fair 
To these with gracious mind; for his heart yearned 
O'er the Achaeans, by the Trojan men 
And mighty-souled Eurypylus hard-bestead. 
On either side of Neoptolemus sat 
Those heroes, gladdening his soul with tales 
Of his sire's mighty deeds -- of all he wrought 
In sea-raids, and in valiant Telephus' land, 
And how he smote round Priam's burg the men 
Of Troy, for glory unto Atreus' sons. 
His heart glowed, fain to grasp his heritage, 
His aweless father's honour and renown. 

In her bower, sorrowing for her son the while, 
Deidameia poured forth sighs and tears. 
With agony of soul her very heart 
Melted in her, as over coals doth lead 
Or wax, and never did her moaning cease, 
As o'er the wide sea her gaze followed him. 
Ay, for her son a mother fretteth still, 
Though it be to a feast that he hath gone, 
By a friend bidden forth. But soon the sail 
Of that good ship far-fleeting o'er the blue 
Grew faint and fainter -- melted in sea-haze. 
But still she sighed, still daylong made her moan. 

On ran the ship before a following wind, 
Seeming to skim the myriad-surging sea, 
And crashed the dark wave either side the prow: 
Swiftly across the abyss unplumbed she sped. 
Night's darkness fell about her, but the breeze 
Held, and the steersman's hand was sure. O'er gulfs 
Of brine she flew, till Dawn divine rose up 
To climb the sky. Then sighted they the peaks 
Of Ida, Chrysa next, and Smintheus' fane, 
Then the Sigean strand, and then the tomb 
Of Aeacus' son. Yet would Laertes' seed, 
The man discreet of soul, not point it out 
To Neoptolemus, lest the tide of grief 
Too high should swell within his breast. They passed 
Calydnae's isles, left Tenedos behind; 
And now was seen the fane of Eleus, 
Where stands Protesilaus' tomb, beneath 
The shade of towcry elms; when, soaring high 
Above the plain, their topmost boughs discern 
Troy, straightway wither all their highest sprays. 
Nigh Ilium now the ship by wind and oar 
Was brought: they saw the long strand fringed with keels

Of Argives, who endured sore travail of war 
Even then about the wall, the which themselves 
Had reared to screen the ships and men in stress 
Of battle. Even now Eurypylus' hands 
To earth were like to dash it and destroy; 
But the quick eyes of Tydeus' strong son marked 
How rained the darts and stones on that long wall. 
Forth of the ship he sprang, and shouted loud 
With all the strength of his undaunted breast: 
"Friends, on the Argive men is heaped this day 
Sore travail! Let us don our flashing arms 
With speed, and to yon battle-turmoil haste. 
For now upon our towers the warrior sons 
Of Troy press hard -- yea, haply will they tear 
The long walls down, and burn the ships with fire, 
And so the souls that long for home-return 
Shall win it never; nay, ourselves shall fall 
Before our due time, and shall lie in graves 
In Troyland, far from children and from wives." 

All as one man down from the ship they leapt; 
For trembling seized on all for that grim sight -- 
On all save aweless Neoptolemus 
Whose might was like his father's: lust of war 
Swept o'er him. To Odysseus' tent in haste 
They sped, for close it lay to where the ship 
Touched land. About its walls was hung great store 
Of change of armour, of wise Odysseus some, 
And rescued some from gallant comrades slain. 
Then did the brave man put on goodly arms; 
But they in whose breasts faintlier beat their hearts 
Must don the worser. Odysseus stood arrayed 
In those which came with him from Ithaca: 
To Diomede he gave fair battle-gear 
Stripped in time past from mighty Socus slain. 
But in his father's arms Achilles' son 
Clad him and lo, he seemed Achilles' self! 
Light on his limbs and lapping close they lay -- 
So cunning was Hephaestus' workmanship -- 
Which for another had been a giant's arms. 
The massive helmet cumbered not his brows; 
Yea, the great Pelian spear-shaft burdened not 
His hand, but lightly swung he up on high 
The heavy and tall lance thirsting still for blood. 

Of many Argives which beheld him then 
Might none draw nigh to him, how fain soe'er, 
So fast were they in that grim grapple locked 
Of the wild war that raged all down the wall. 
But as when shipmen, under a desolate isle 
Mid the wide sea by stress of weather bound, 
Chafe, while afar from men the adverse blasts 
Prison them many a day; they pace the deck 
With sinking hearts, while scantier grows their store 
Of food; they weary till a fair wind sings; 
So joyed the Achaean host, which theretofore 
Were heavy of heart, when Neoptolemus came, 
Joyed in the hope of breathing-space from toil. 
Then like the aweless lion's flashed his eyes, 
Which mid the mountains leaps in furious mood 
To meet the hunters that draw nigh his cave, 
Thinking to steal his cubs, there left alone 
In a dark-shadowed glen but from a height 
The beast hath spied, and on the spoilers leaps 
With grim jaws terribly roaring; even so 
That glorious child of Aeacus' aweless son 
Against the Trojan warriors burned in wrath. 
Thither his eagle-swoop descended first 
Where loudest from the plain uproared the fight, 
There weakest, he divined, must be the wall, 
The battlements lowest, since the surge of foes 
Brake heaviest there. Charged at his side the rest 
Breathing the battle-spirit. There they found 
Eurypylus mighty of heart and all his men 
Scaling a tower, exultant in the hope 
Of tearing down the walls, of slaughtering 
The Argives in one holocaust. No mind 
The Gods had to accomplish their desire! 
But now Odysseus, Diomede the strong, 
Leonteus, and Neoptolemus, as a God 
In strength and beauty, hailed their javelins down, 
And thrust them from the wall. As dogs and shepherds 
By shouting and hard fighting drive away 
Strong lions from a steading, rushing forth 
From all sides, and the brutes with glaring eyes 
Pace to and fro; with savage lust for blood 
Of calves and kine their jaws are slavering; 
Yet must their onrush give back from the hounds 
And fearless onset of the shepherd folk; 
[So from these new defenders shrank the foe] 
A little, far as one may hurl a stone 
Exceeding great; for still Eurypylus 
Suffered them not to flee far from the ships, 
But cheered them on to bide the brunt, until 
The ships be won, and all the Argives slain; 
For Zeus with measureless might thrilled all his frame. 
Then seized he a rugged stone and huge, and leapt 
And hurled it full against the high-built wall. 
It crashed, and terribly boomed that rampart steep 
To its foundations. Terror gripped the Greeks, 
As though that wall had crumbled down in dust; 
Yet from the deadly conflict flinched they not, 
But stood fast, like to jackals or to wolves 
Bold robbers of the sheep -- when mid the hills 
Hunter and hound would drive them forth their caves, 
Being grimly purposed there to slay their whelps. 
Yet these, albeit tormented by the darts, 
Flee not, but for their cubs' sake bide and fight; 
So for the ships' sake they abode and fought, 
And for their own lives. But Eurypylus 
Afront of all the ships stood, taunting them: 
"Coward and dastard souls! no darts of yours 
Had given me pause, nor thrust back from your ships, 
Had not your rampart stayed mine onset-rush. 
Ye are like to dogs, that in a forest flinch 
Before a lion! Skulking therewithin 
Ye are fighting -- nay, are shrinking back from death! 
But if ye dare come forth on Trojan ground, 
As once when ye were eager for the fray, 
None shall from ghastly death deliver you: 
Slain by mine hand ye all shall lie in dust!" 

So did he shout a prophecy unfulfilled, 
Nor heard Doom's chariot-wheels fast rolling near 
Bearing swift death at Neoptolemus' hands, 
Nor saw death gleaming from his glittering spear. 
Ay, and that hero paused not now from fight, 
But from the ramparts smote the Trojans aye. 
From that death leaping from above they quailed 
In tumult round Eurypylus: deadly fear 
Gripped all their hearts. As little children cower 
About a father's knees when thunder of Zeus 
Crashes from cloud to cloud, when all the air 
Shudders and groans, so did the sons of Troy, 
With those Ceteians round their great king, cower 
Ever as prince Neoptolemus hurled; for death 
Rode upon all he cast, and bare his wrath 
Straight rushing down upon the heads of foes. 
Now in their hearts those wildered Trojans said 
That once more they beheld Achilles' self 
Gigantic in his armour. Yet they hid 
That horror in their breasts, lest panic fear 
Should pass from them to the Ceteian host 
And king Eurypylus; so on every side 
They wavered 'twixt the stress of their hard strait 
And that blood-curdling dread, 'twixt shame and fear. 
As when men treading a precipitous path 
Look up, and see adown the mountain-slope 
A torrent rushing on them, thundering down 
The rocks, and dare not meet its clamorous flood, 
But hurry shuddering on, with death in sight 
Holding as naught the perils of the path; 
So stayed the Trojans, spite of their desire 
[To flee the imminent death that waited them] 
Beneath the wall. Godlike Eurypylus 
Aye cheered them on to fight. He trusted still 
That this new mighty foe would weary at last 
With toil of slaughter; but he wearied not. 

That desperate battle-travail Pallas saw, 
And left the halls of Heaven incense-sweet, 
And flew o'er mountain-crests: her hurrying feet 
Touched not the earth, borne by the air divine 
In form of cloud-wreaths, swifter than the wind. 
She came to Troy, she stayed her feet upon 
Sigeum's windy ness, she looked forth thence 
Over the ringing battle of dauntless men, 
And gave the Achaeans glory. Achilles' son 
Beyond the rest was filled with valour and strength 
Which win renown for men in whom they meet. 
Peerless was he in both: the blood of Zeus 
Gave strength; to his father's valour was he heir; 
So by those towers he smote down many a foe. 
And as a fisher on the darkling sea, 
To lure the fish to their destruction, takes 
Within his boat the strength of fire; his breath 
Kindles it to a flame, till round the boat 
Glareth its splendour, and from the black sea 
Dart up the fish all eager to behold 
The radiance -- for the last time; for the barbs 
Of his three-pointed spear, as up they leap, 
Slay them; his heart rejoices o'er the prey. 
So that war-king Achilles' glorious son 
Slew hosts of onward-rushing foes around 
That wall of stone. Well fought the Achaeans all, 
Here, there, adown the ramparts: rang again 
The wide strand and the ships: the battered walls 
Groaned ever. Men with weary ache of toil 
Fainted on either side; sinews and might 
Of strong men were unstrung. But o'er the son 
Of battle-stay Achilles weariness 
Crept not: his battle-eager spirit aye 
Was tireless; never touched by palsying fear 
He fought on, as with the triumphant strength 
Of an ever-flowing river: though it roll 
'Twixt blazing forests, though the madding blast 
Roll stormy seas of flame, it feareth not, 
For at its brink faint grows the fervent heat, 
The strong flood turns its might to impotence; 
So weariness nor fear could bow the knees 
Of Hero Achilles' gallant-hearted son, 
Still as he fought, still cheered his comrades on. 
Of myriad shafts sped at him none might touch 
His flesh, but even as snowflakes on a rock 
Fell vainly ever: wholly screened was he 
By broad shield and strong helmet, gifts of a God. 
In these exulting did the Aeacid's son 
Stride all along the wall, with ringing shouts 
Cheering the dauntless Argives to the fray, 
Being their mightiest far, bearing a soul 
Insatiate of the awful onset-cry, 
Burning with one strong purpose, to avenge 
His father's death: the Myrmidons in their king 
Exulted. Roared the battle round the wall. 

Two sons he slew of Meges rich in gold, 
Scion of Dymas -- sons of high renown, 
Cunning to hurl the dart, to drive the steed 
In war, and deftly cast the lance afar, 
Born at one birth beside Sangarius' banks 
Of Periboea to him, Celtus one, 
And Eubius the other. But not long 
His boundless wealth enjoyed they, for the 
Fates Span them a thread of life exceeding brief. 
As on one day they saw the light, they died 
On one day by the same hand. To the heart 
Of one Neoptolemus sped a javelin; one 
He smote down with a massy stone that crashed 
Through his strong helmet, shattered all its ridge, 
And dashed his brains to earth. Around them fell 
Foes many, a host untold. The War-god's work 
Waxed ever mightier till the eventide, 
Till failed the light celestial; then the host 
Of brave Eurypylus from the ships drew back 
A little: they that held those leaguered towers 
Had a short breathing-space; the sons of Troy 
Had respite from the deadly-echoing strife, 
From that hard rampart-battle. Verily all 
The Argives had beside their ships been slain, 
Had not Achilles' strong son on that day 
Withstood the host of foes and their great chief 
Eurypylus. Came to that young hero's side 
Phoenix the old, and marvelling gazed on one 
The image of Peleides. Tides of joy 
And grief swept o'er him -- grief, for memories 
Of that swift-footed father -- joy, for sight 
Of such a son. He for sheer gladness wept; 
For never without tears the tribes of men 
Live -- nay, not mid the transports of delight. 
He clasped him round as father claspeth son 
Whom, after long and troublous wanderings, 
The Gods bring home to gladden a father's heart. 
So kissed he Neoptolemus' head and breast, 
Clasping him round, and cried in rapture of joy: 
"Hail, goodly son of that Achilles whom 
I nursed a little one in mine own arms 
With a glad heart. By Heaven's high providence 
Like a strong sapling waxed he in stature fast, 
And daily I rejoiced to see his form 
And prowess, my life's blessing, honouring him 
As though he were the son of mine old age; 
For like a father did he honour me. 
I was indeed his father, he my son 
In spirit: thou hadst deemed us of one blood 
Who were in heart one: but of nobler mould 
Was he by far, in form and strength a God. 
Thou art wholly like him -- yea, I seem to see 
Alive amid the Argives him for whom 
Sharp anguish shrouds me ever. I waste away 
In sorrowful age -- oh that the grave had closed 
On me while yet he lived! How blest to be 
By loving hands of kinsmen laid to rest! 
Ah child, my sorrowing heart will nevermore 
Forget him! Chide me not for this my grief. 
But now, help thou the Myrmidons and Greeks 
In their sore strait: wreak on the foe thy wrath 
For thy brave sire. It shall be thy renown 
To slay this war-insatiate Telephus' son; 
For mightier art thou, and shalt prove, than he, 
As was thy father than his wretched sire." 

Made answer golden-haired Achilles' son: 
"Ancient, our battle-prowess mighty Fate 
And the o'ermastering War-god shall decide." 

But, as he spake, he had fain on that same day 
Forth of the gates have rushed in his sire's arms; 
But night, which bringeth men release from toil, 
Rose from the ocean veiled in sable pall. 

With honour as of mighty Achilles' self 
Him mid the ships the glad Greeks hailed, who had won 
Courage from that his eager rush to war. 
With princely presents did they honour him, 
With priceless gifts, whereby is wealth increased; 
For some gave gold and silver, handmaids some, 
Brass without weight gave these, and iron those; 
Others in deep jars brought the ruddy wine: 
Yea, fleetfoot steeds they gave, and battle-gear, 
And raiment woven fair by women's hands. 
Glowed Neoptolemus' heart for joy of these. 
A feast they made for him amidst the tents, 
And there extolled Achilles' godlike son 
With praise as of the immortal Heavenly Ones; 
And joyful-voiced Agamemnon spake to him: 
"Thou verily art the brave-souled Aeacid's son, 
His very image thou in stalwart might, 
In beauty, stature, courage, and in soul. 
Mine heart burns in me seeing thee. I trust 
Thine hands and spear shall smite yon hosts of foes, 
Shall smite the city of Priam world-renowned -- 
So like thy sire thou art! Methinks I see 
Himself beside the ships, as when his shout 
Of wrath for dead Patroclus shook the ranks 
Of Troy. But he is with the Immortal Ones, 
Yet, bending from that heaven, sends thee to-day 
To save the Argives on destruction's brink." 

Answered Achilles' battle-eager son: 
"Would I might meet him living yet, O King, 
That so himself might see the son of his love 
Not shaming his great father's name. I trust 
So shall it be, if the Gods grant me life." 

So spake he in wisdom and in modesty; 
And all there marvelled at the godlike man. 
But when with meat and wine their hearts were filled, 
Then rose Achilles' battle-eager son, 
And from the feast passed forth unto the tent 
That was his sire's. Much armour of heroes slain 
Lay there; and here and there were captive maids 
Arraying that tent widowed of its lord, 
As though its king lived. When that son beheld 
Those Trojan arms and handmaid-thralls, he groaned, 
By passionate longing for his father seized. 
As when through dense oak-groves and tangled glens 
Comes to the shadowed cave a lion's whelp 
Whose grim sire by the hunters hath been slain, 
And looketh all around that empty den, 
And seeth heaps of bones of steeds and kine 
Slain theretofore, and grieveth for his sire; 
Even so the heart of brave Peleides' son 
With grief was numbed. The handmaids marvelling gazed; 
And fair Briseis' self, when she beheld 
Achilles' son, was now right glad at heart, 
And sorrowed now with memories of the dead. 
Her soul was wildered all, as though indeed 
There stood the aweless Aeacid living yet. 

Meanwhile exultant Trojans camped aloof 
Extolled Eurypylus the fierce and strong, 
As erst they had praised Hector, when he smote 
Their foes, defending Troy and all her wealth. 
But when sweet sleep stole over mortal men, 
Then sons of Troy and battle-biding Greeks 
All slumber-heavy slept unsentinelled. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK VIII

How Hercules' Grandson Perished in Fight With the Son of Achilles

When from the far sea-line, where is the cave 
Of Dawn, rose up the sun, and scattered light 
Over the earth, then did the eager sons 
Of Troy and of Achaea arm themselves 
Athirst for battle: these Achilles' son 
Cheered on to face the Trojans awelessly; 
And those the giant strength of Telephus' seed 
Kindled. He trusted to dash down the wall 
To earth, and utterly destroy the ships 
With ravening fire, and slay the Argive host. 
Ah, but his hope was as the morning breeze 
Delusive: hard beside him stood the Fates 
Laughing to scorn his vain imaginings. 

Then to the Myrmidons spake Achilles' son, 
The aweless, to the fight enkindling them: 
"Hear me, mine henchmen: take ye to your hearts 
The spirit of war, that we may heal the wounds 
Of Argos, and be ruin to her foes. 
Let no man fear, for mighty prowess is 
The child of courage; but fear slayeth strength 
And spirit. Gird yourselves with strength for war; 
Give foes no breathing-space, that they may say 
That mid our ranks Achilles liveth yet." 

Then clad he with his father's flashing arms 
His shoulders. Then exulted Thetis' heart 
When from the sea she saw the mighty strength 
Of her son's son. Then forth with eagle-speed 
Afront of that high wall he rushed, his ear 
Drawn by the immortal horses of his sire. 
As from the ocean-verge upsprings the sun 
In glory, flashing fire far over earth -- 
Fire, when beside his radiant chariot-team 
Races the red star Sirius, scatterer 
Of woefullest diseases over men; 
So flashed upon the eyes of Ilium's host 
That battle-eager hero, Achilles' son. 
Onward they whirled him, those immortal steeds, 
The which, when now he longed to chase the foe 
Back from the ships, Automedon, who wont 
To rein them for his father, brought to him. 
With joy that pair bore battleward their lord, 
So like to Aeacus' son, their deathless hearts 
Held him no worser than Achilles' self. 
Laughing for glee the Argives gathered round 
The might resistless of Neoptolemus, 
Eager for fight as wasps [whose woodland bower 
The axe] hath shaken, who dart swarming forth 
Furious to sting the woodman: round their nest 
Long eddying, they torment all passers by; 
So streamed they forth from galley and from wall 
Burning for fight, and that wide space was thronged, 
And all the plain far blazed with armour-sheen, 
As shone from heaven's vault the sun thereon. 
As flees the cloud-rack through the welkin wide 
Scourged onward by the North-wind's Titan blasts, 
When winter-tide and snow are hard at hand, 
And darkness overpalls the firmament; 
So with their thronging squadrons was the earth 
Covered before the ships. To heaven uprolled, 
Dust hung on hovering wings' men's armour clashed; 
Rattled a thousand chariots; horses neighed 
On-rushing to the fray. Each warrior's prowess 
Kindled him with its trumpet-call to war. 

As leap the long sea-rollers, onward hurled 
By two winds terribly o'er th' broad sea-flood 
Roaring from viewless bournes, with whirlwind blasts 
Crashing together, when a ruining storm 
Maddens along the wide gulfs of the deep, 
And moans the Sea-queen with her anguished waves 
Which sweep from every hand, uptowering 
Like precipiced mountains, while the bitter squall, 
Ceaselessly veering, shrieks across the sea; 
So clashed in strife those hosts from either hand 
With mad rage. Strife incarnate spurred them on, 
And their own prowess. Crashed together these 
Like thunderclouds outlightening, thrilling the air. 
With shattering trumpet-challenge, when the blasts 
Are locked in frenzied wrestle, with mad breath 
Rending the clouds, when Zeus is wroth with men 
Who travail with iniquity, and flout 
His law. So grappled they, as spear with spear 
Clashed, shield with shield, and man on man was hurled. 

And first Achilles' war-impetuous son 
Struck down stout Melaneus and Alcidamas, 
Sons of the war-lord Alexinomus, 
Who dwelt in Caunus mountain-cradled, nigh 
The clear lake shining at Tarbelus' feet 
'Neath snow-capt Imbrus. Menes, fleetfoot son 
Of King Cassandrus, slew he, born to him 
By fair Creusa, where the lovely streams 
Of Lindus meet the sea, beside the marches 
Of battle-biding Carians, and the heights 
Of Lycia the renowned. He slew withal 
Morys the spearman, who from Phrygia came; 
Polybus and Hippomedon by his side 
He laid, this stabbed to the heart, that pierced between

Shoulder and neck: man after man he slew. 
Earth groaned 'neath Trojan corpses; rank on rank 
Crumbled before him, even as parched brakes 
Sink down before the blast of ravening fire 
When the north wind of latter summer blows; 
So ruining squadrons fell before his charge. 

Meanwhile Aeneas slew Aristolochus, 
Crashing a great stone down on his head: it brake 
Helmet and skull together, and fled his life. 
Fleetfoot Eumaeus Diomede slew; he dwelt 
In craggy Dardanus, where the bride-bed is 
Whereon Anchises clasped the Queen of Love. 
Agamemnon smote down Stratus: unto Thrace 
Returned he not from war, but died far off 
From his dear fatherland. And Meriones 
Struck Chlemus down, Peisenor's son, the friend 
Of god-like Glaucus, and his comrade leal, 
Who by Limurus' outfall dwelt: the folk 
Honoured him as their king, when reigned no more 
Glaucus, in battle slain, -- all who abode 
Around Phoenice's towers, and by the crest 
Of Massicytus, and Chimaera's glen. 

So man slew man in fight; but more than all 
Eurypylus hurled doom on many a foe. 
First slew he battle-bider Eurytus, 
Menoetius of the glancing taslet next, 
Elephenor's godlike comrades. Fell with these 
Harpalus, wise Odysseus' warrior-friend; 
But in the fight afar that hero toiled, 
And might not aid his fallen henchman: yet 
Fierce Antiphus for that slain man was wroth, 
And hurled his spear against Eurypylus, 
Yet touched him not; the strong shaft glanced aside, 
And pierced Meilanion battle-staunch, the son 
Of Cleite lovely-faced, Erylaus' bride, 
Who bare him where Caicus meets the sea. 
Wroth for his comrade slain, Eurypylus 
Rushed upon Antiphus, but terror-winged 
He plunged amid his comrades; so the spear 
Of the avenger slew him not, whose doom 
Was one day wretchedly to be devoured 
By the manslaying Cyclops: so it pleased 
Stern Fate, I know not why. Elsewhither sped 
Eurypylus; and aye as he rushed on 
Fell 'neath his spear a multitude untold. 
As tall trees, smitten by the strength of steel 
In mountain-forest, fill the dark ravines, 
Heaped on the earth confusedly, so fell 
The Achaeans 'neath Eurypylus' flying spears -- 
Till heart-uplifted met him face to face 
Achilles' son. The long spears in their hands 
They twain swung up, each hot to smite his foe. 
But first Eurypylus cried the challenge-cry; 
"Who art thou? Whence hast come to brave me here? 
To Hades merciless Fate is bearing thee; 
For in grim fight hath none escaped mine hands; 
But whoso, eager for the fray, have come 
Hither, on all have I hurled anguished death. 
By Xanthus' streams have dogs devoured their flesh 
And gnawed their bones. Answer me, who art thou? 
Whose be the steeds that bear thee exultant on?" 

Answered Achilles' battle-eager son: 
"Wherefore, when I am hurrying to the fray, 
Dost thou, a foe, put question thus to me, 
As might a friend, touching my lineage, 
Which many know? Achilles' son am I, 
Son of the man whose long spear smote thy sire, 
And made him flee -- yea, and the ruthless fates 
Of death had seized him, but my father's self 
Healed him upon the brink of woeful death. 
The steeds which bear me were my godlike sire's; 
These the West-wind begat, the Harpy bare: 
Over the barren sea their feet can race 
Skimming its crests: in speed they match the winds. 
Since then thou know'st the lineage of my steeds 
And mine, now put thou to the test the might 
Of my strong spear, born on steep Pelion's crest, 
Who hath left his father-stock and forest there." 

He spake; and from the chariot sprang to earth 
That glorious man: he swung the long spear up. 
But in his brawny hand his foe hath seized 
A monstrous stone: full at the golden shield 
Of Neoptolemus he sped its flight; 
But, no whir staggered by its whirlwind rush, 
He like a giant mountain-foreland stood 
Which all the banded fury of river-floods 
Can stir not, rooted in the eternal hills; 
So stood unshaken still Achilles' son. 
Yet not for this Eurypylus' dauntless might 
Shrank from Achilles' son invincible, 
On-spurred by his own hardihood and by Fate. 
Their hearts like caldrons seethed o'er fires of wrath, 
Their glancing armour flashed about their limbs. 
Like terrible lions each on other rushed, 
Which fight amid the mountains famine-stung, 
Writhing and leaping in the strain of strife 
For a slain ox or stag, while all the glens 
Ring with their conflict; so they grappled, so 
Clashed they in pitiless strife. On either hand 
Long lines of warriors Greek and Trojan toiled 
In combat: round them roared up flames of war. 
Like mighty rushing winds they hurled together 
With eager spears for blood of life athirst. 
Hard by them stood Enyo, spurred them on 
Ceaselessly: never paused they from the strife. 
Now hewed they each the other's shield, and now 
Thrust at the greaves, now at the crested helms. 
Reckless of wounds, in that grim toil pressed on 
Those aweless heroes: Strife incarnate watched 
And gloated o'er them. Ran the sweat in streams 
From either: straining hard they stood their ground, 
For both were of the seed of Blessed Ones. 
From Heaven, with hearts at variance, Gods looked down; 
For some gave glory to Achilles' son, 
Some to Eurypylus the godlike. Still 
They fought on, giving ground no more than rock. 
Of granite mountains. Rang from side to side 
Spear-smitten shields. At last the Pelian lance, 
Sped onward by a mighty thrust, hath passed 
Clear through Eurypylus' throat. Forth poured the blood 
Torrent-like; through the portal of the wound 
The soul from the body flew: darkness of death 
Dropped o'er his eyes. To earth in clanging arms 
He fell, like stately pine or silver fir 
Uprooted by the fury of Boreas; 
Such space of earth Eurypylus' giant frame 
Covered in falling: rang again the floor 
And plain of Troyland. Grey death-pallor swept 
Over the corpse, and all the flush of life 
Faded away. With a triumphant laugh 
Shouted the mighty hero over him: 
"Eurypylus, thou saidst thou wouldst destroy 
The Danaan ships and men, wouldst slay us all 
Wretchedly -- but the Gods would not fulfil 
Thy wish. For all thy might invincible, 
My father's massy spear hath now subdued 
Thee under me, that spear no man shall 'scape, 
Though he be brass all through, who faceth me." 

He spake, and tore the long lance from the corse, 
While shrank the Trojans back in dread, at sight 
Of that strong-hearted man. Straightway he stripped 
The armour from the dead, for friends to bear 
Fast to the ships Achaean. But himself 
To the swift chariot and the tireless steeds 
Sprang, and sped onward like a thunderbolt 
That lightning-girdled leaps through the wide air 
From Zeus's hands unconquerable -- the bolt 
Before whose downrush all the Immortals quail 
Save only Zeus. It rusheth down to earth, 
It rendeth trees and rugged mountain-crags; 
So rushed he on the Trojans, flashing doom 
Before their eyes; dashed to the earth they fell 
Before the charge of those immortal steeds: 
The earth was heaped with slain, was dyed with gore. 
As when in mountain-glens the unnumbered leaves 
Down-streaming thick and fast hide all the ground, 
So hosts of Troy untold on earth were strewn 
By Neoptolemus and fierce-hearted Greeks, 
Shed by whose hands the blood in torrents ran 
'Neath feet of men and horses. Chariot-rails 
Were dashed with blood-spray whirled up from the tyres. 

Now had the Trojans fled within their gates 
As calves that flee a lion, or as swine 
Flee from a storm -- but murderous Ares came, 
Unmarked of other Gods, down from the heavens, 
Eager to help the warrior sons of Troy. 
Red-fire and Flame, Tumult and Panic-fear, 
His car-steeds, bare him down into the fight, 
The coursers which to roaring Boreas 
Grim-eyed Erinnys bare, coursers that breathed 
Life-blasting flame: groaned all the shivering air, 
As battleward they sped. Swiftly he came 
To Troy: loud rang the earth beneath the feet 
Of that wild team. Into the battle's heart 
Tossing his massy spear, he came; with a shout 
He cheered the Trojans on to face the foe. 
They heard, and marvelled at that wondrous cry, 
Not seeing the God's immortal form, nor steeds, 
Veiled in dense mist. But the wise prophet-soul 
Of Helenus knew the voice divine that leapt 
Unto the Trojans' ears, they knew not whence, 
And with glad heart to the fleeing host he cried: 
"O cravens, wherefore fear Achilles' son, 
Though ne'er so brave? He is mortal even as we; 
His strength is not as Ares' strength, who is come 
A very present help in our sore need. 
That was his shout far-pealing, bidding us 
Fight on against the Argives. Let your hearts 
Be strong, O friends: let courage fill your breasts. 
No mightier battle-helper can draw nigh 
To Troy than he. Who is of more avail 
For war than Ares, when he aideth men 
Hard-fighting? Lo, to our help he cometh now! 
On to the fight! Cast to the winds your fears!" 

They fled no more, they faced the Argive men, 
As hounds, that mid the copses fled at first, 
Turn them about to face and fight the wolf, 
Spurred by the chiding of their shepherd-lord; 
So turned the sons of Troy again to war, 
Casting away their fear. Man leapt on man 
Valiantly fighting; loud their armour clashed 
Smitten with swords, with lances, and with darts. 
Spears plunged into men's flesh: dread Ares drank 
His fill of blood: struck down fell man on man, 
As Greek and Trojan fought. In level poise 
The battle-balance hung. As when young men 
In hot haste prune a vineyard with the steel, 
And each keeps pace with each in rivalry, 
Since all in strength and age be equal-matched; 
So did the awful scales of battle hang 
Level: all Trojan hearts beat high, and firm 
Stood they in trust on aweless Ares' might, 
While the Greeks trusted in Achilles' son. 
Ever they slew and slew: stalked through the midst 
Deadly Enyo, her shoulders and her hands 
Blood-splashed, while fearful sweat streamed from her limbs.

Revelling in equal fight, she aided none, 
Lest Thetis' or the War-god's wrath be stirred. 

Then Neoptolemus slew one far-renowned, 
Perimedes, who had dwelt by Smintheus' grove; 
Next Cestrus died, Phalerus battle-staunch, 
Perilaus the strong, Menalcas lord of spears, 
Whom Iphianassa bare by the haunted foot 
Of Cilla to the cunning craftsman Medon. 
In the home-land afar the sire abode, 
And never kissed his son's returning head: 
For that fair home and all his cunning works 
Did far-off kinsmen wrangle o'er his grave. 
Deiphobus slew Lycon battle-staunch: 
The lance-head pierced him close above the groin, 
And round the long spear all his bowels gushed out. 
Aeneas smote down Dymas, who erewhile 
In Aulis dwelt, and followed unto Troy 
Arcesilaus, and saw never more 
The dear home-land. Euryalus hurled a dart, 
And through Astraeus' breast the death-winged point 
Flew, shearing through the breathways of man's life; 
And all that lay within was drenched with blood. 
And hard thereby great-souled Agenor slew 
Hippomenes, hero Teucer's comrade staunch, 
With one swift thrust 'twixt shoulder and neck: his soul

Rushed forth in blood; death's night swept over him. 
Grief for his comrade slain on Teucer fell; 
He strained his bow, a swift-winged shaft he sped, 
But smote him not, for slightly Agenor swerved. 
Yet nigh him Deiophontes stood; the shaft 
Into his left eye plunged, passed through the ball, 
And out through his right ear, because the Fates 
Whither they willed thrust on the bitter barbs. 
Even as in agony he leapt full height, 
Yet once again the archer's arrow hissed: 
It pierced his throat, through the neck-sinews cleft 
Unswerving, and his hard doom came on him. 

So man to man dealt death; and joyed the Fates 
And Doom, and fell Strife in her maddened glee 
Shouted aloud, and Ares terribly 
Shouted in answer, and with courage thrilled 
The Trojans, and with panic fear the Greeks, 
And shook their reeling squadrons. But one man 
He scared not, even Achilles' son; he abode, 
And fought undaunted, slaying foes on foes. 
As when a young lad sweeps his hand around 
Flies swarming over milk, and nigh the bowl 
Here, there they lie, struck dead by that light touch, 
And gleefully the child still plies the work; 
So stern Achilles' glorious scion joyed 
Over the slain, and recked not of the God 
Who spurred the Trojans on: man after man 
Tasted his vengeance of their charging host. 
Even as a giant mountain-peak withstands 
On-rushing hurricane-blasts, so he abode 
Unquailing. Ares at his eager mood 
Grew wroth, and would have cast his veil of cloud 
Away, and met him face to face in fight, 
But now Athena from Olympus swooped 
To forest-mantled Ida. Quaked the earth 
And Xanthus' murmuring streams; so mightily 
She shook them: terror-stricken were the souls 
Of all the Nymphs, adread for Priam's town. 
From her immortal armour flashed around 
The hovering lightnings; fearful serpents breathed 
Fire from her shield invincible; the crest 
Of her great helmet swept the clouds. And now 
She was at point to close in sudden fight 
With Ares; but the mighty will of Zeus 
Daunted them both, from high heaven thundering 
His terrors. Ares drew back from the war, 
For manifest to him was Zeus's wrath. 
To wintry Thrace he passed; his haughty heart 
Reeked no more of the Trojans. In the plain 
Of Troy no more stayed Pallas; she was gone 
To hallowed Athens. But the armies still 
Strove in the deadly fray; and fainted now 
The Trojans' prowess; but all battle-fain 
The Argives pressed on these as they gave ground. 
As winds chase ships that fly with straining sails 
On to the outsea -- as on forest-brakes 
Leapeth the fury of flame -- as swift hounds drive 
Deer through the mountains, eager for the prey, 
So did the Argives chase them: Achilles' son 
Still cheered them on, still slew with that great spear 
Whomso he overtook. On, on they fled 
Till into stately-gated Troy they poured. 

Then had the Argives a short breathing-space 
From war, when they had penned the hosts of Troy 
In Priam's burg, as shepherds pen up lambs 
Upon a lonely steading. And, as when 
After hard strain, a breathing-space is given 
To oxen that, quick-panting 'neath the yoke, 
Up a steep hill have dragged a load, so breathed 
Awhile the Achaeans after toil in arms. 
Then once more hot for the fray did they beset 
The city-towers. But now with gates fast barred 
The Trojans from the walls withstood the assault. 
As when within their steading shepherd-folk 
Abide the lowering tempest, when a day 
Of storm hath dawned, with fury of lightnings, rain 
And heavy-drifting snow, and dare not haste 
Forth to the pasture, howsoever fain, 
Till the great storm abate, and rivers, wide 
With rushing floods, again be passable; 
So trembling on their walls they abode the rage 
Of foes against their ramparts surging fast. 
And as when daws or starlings drop in clouds 
Down on an orchard-close, full fain to feast 
Upon its pleasant fruits, and take no heed 
Of men that shout to scare them thence away, 
Until the reckless hunger be appeased 
That makes them bold; so poured round Priam's burg 
The furious Danaans. Against the gates 
They hurled themselves, they strove to batter down 
The mighty-souled Earth-shaker's work divine. 

Yet did tim Troyfolk not, despite their fear, 
Flinch from the fight: they manned their towers, they toiled

Unresting: ever from the fair-built walls 
Leapt arrows, stones, and fleet-winged javelins down 
Amidst the thronging foes; for Phoebus thrilled 
Their souls with steadfast hardihood. Fain was he 
To save them still, though Hector was no more. 

Then Meriones shot forth a deadly shaft, 
And smote Phylodamas, Polites' friend, 
Beneath the jaw; the arrow pierced his throat. 
Down fell he like a vulture, from a rock 
By fowler's barbed arrow shot and slain; 
So from the high tower swiftly down he fell: 
His life fled; clanged his armour o'er the corpse. 
With laughter of triumph stalwart Molus' son 
A second arrow sped, with strong desire 
To smite Polites, ill-starred Priam's son: 
But with a swift side-swerve did he escape 
The death, nor did the arrow touch his flesh. 
As when a shipman, as his bark flies on 
O'er sea-gulfs, spies amid the rushing tide 
A rock, and to escape it swiftly puts 
The helm about, and turns aside the ship 
Even as he listeth, that a little strength 
Averts a great disaster; so did he 
Foresee and shun the deadly shaft of doom. 

Ever they fought on; walls, towers, battlements 
Were blood-besprent, wherever Trojans fell 
Slain by the arrows of the stalwart Greeks. 
Yet these escaped not scatheless; many of them 
Dyed the earth red: aye waxed the havoc of death 
As friends and foes were stricken. O'er the strife 
Shouted for glee Enyo, sister of War. 

Now had the Argives burst the gates, had breached 
The walls of Troy, for boundless was their might; 
But Ganymedes saw from heaven, and cried, 
Anguished with fear for his own fatherland: 
"O Father Zeus, if of thy seed I am, 
If at thine best I left far-famous Troy 
For immortality with deathless Gods, 
O hear me now, whose soul is anguish-thrilled! 
I cannot bear to see my fathers' town 
In flames, my kindred in disastrous strife  
Perishing: bitterer sorrow is there none! 
Oh, if thine heart is fixed to do this thing, 
Let me be far hence! Less shall be my grief 
If I behold it not with these mine eyes. 
That is the depth of horror and of shame 
To see one's country wrecked by hands of foes." 

With groans and tears so pleaded Ganymede. 
Then Zeus himself with one vast pall of cloud 
Veiled all the city of Priam world-renowned; 
And all the murderous fight was drowned in mist, 
And like a vanished phantom was the wall 
In vapours heavy-hung no eye could pierce; 
And all around crashed thunders, lightnings flamed 
From heaven. The Danaans heard Zeus' clarion peal 
Awe-struck; and Neleus' son cried unto them: 
"Far-famous lords of Argives, all our strength 
Palsied shall be, while Zeus protecteth thus 
Our foes. A great tide of calamity 
On us is rolling; haste we then to the ships; 
Cease we awhile from bitter toil of strife, 
Lest the fire of his wrath consume us all. 
Submit we to his portents; needs must all 
Obey him ever, who is mightier far 
Than all strong Gods, all weakling sons of men. 
On the presumptuous Titans once in wrath 
He poured down fire from heaven: then burned all earth 
Beneath, and Ocean's world-engirdling flood 
Boiled from its depths, yea, to its utmost bounds: 
Far-flowing mighty rivers were dried up: 
Perished all broods of life-sustaining earth, 
All fosterlings of the boundless sea, and all 
Dwellers in rivers: smoke and ashes veiled 
The air: earth fainted in the fervent heat. 
Therefore this day I dread the might of Zeus. 
Now, pass we to the ships, since for to-day 
He helpeth Troy. To us too shall he grant 
Glory hereafter; for the dawn on men, 
Though whiles it frown, anon shall smile. Not yet, 
But soon, shall Fate lead us to smite yon town, 
If true indeed was Calchas' prophecy 
Spoken aforetime to the assembled Greeks, 
That in the tenth year Priam's burg should fall." 

Then left they that far-famous town, and turned 
From war, in awe of Zeus's threatenings, 
Hearkening to one with ancient wisdom wise. 
Yet they forgat not friends in battle slain, 
But bare them from the field and buried them. 
These the mist hid not, but the town alone 
And its unscaleable wall, around which fell 
Trojans and Argives many in battle slain. 
So came they to the ships, and put from them 
Their battle-gear, and strode into the waves 
Of Hellespont fair-flowing, and washed away 
All stain of dust and sweat and clotted gore. 

The sun drave down his never-wearying steeds 
Into the dark west: night streamed o'er the earth, 
Bidding men cease from toil. The Argives then 
Acclaimed Achilles' valiant son with praise 
High as his father's. Mid triumphant mirth 
He feasted in kings' tents: no battle-toil 
Had wearied him; for Thetis from his limbs 
Had charmed all ache of travail, making him 
As one whom labour had no power to tire. 
When his strong heart was satisfied with meat, 
He passed to his father's tent, and over him 
Sleep's dews were poured. The Greeks slept in the plain 
Before the ships, by ever-changing guards 
Watched; for they dreaded lest the host of Troy, 
Or of her staunch allies, should kindle flame 
Upon the ships, and from them all cut off 
Their home-return. In Priam's burg the while 
By gate and wall men watched and slept in turn, 
Adread to hear the Argives' onset-shout. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IX

How from His Long Lone Exile Returned To the War Philoctetes

When ended was night's darkness, and the Dawn 
Rose from the world's verge, and the wide air glowed 
With splendour, then did Argos' warrior-sons 
Gaze o'er the plain; and lo, all cloudless-clear 
Stood Ilium's towers. The marvel of yesterday 
Seemed a strange dream. No thought the Trojans had 
Of standing forth to fight without the wall. 
A great fear held them thralls, the awful thought 
That yet alive was Peleus' glorious son. 
But to the King of Heaven Antenor cried: 
"Zeus, Lord of Ida and the starry sky, 
Hearken my prayer! Oh turn back from our town 
That battle-eager murderous-hearted man, 
Be he Achilles who hath not passed down 
To Hades, or some other like to him. 
For now in heaven-descended Priam's burg 
By thousands are her people perishing: 
No respite cometh from calamity: 
Murder and havoc evermore increase. 
O Father Zeus, thou carest not though we 
Be slaughtered of our foes: thou helpest them, 
Forgetting thy son, godlike Dardanus! 
But, if this be the purpose of thine heart 
That Argives shall destroy us wretchedly, 
Now do it: draw not out our agony!" 

In passionate prayer he cried; and Zeus from heaven 
Hearkened, and hasted on the end of all, 
Which else he had delayed. He granted him 
This awful boon, that myriads of Troy's sons 
Should with their children perish: but that prayer 
He granted not, to turn Achilles' son 
Back from the wide-wayed town; nay, all the more 
He enkindled him to war, for he would now 
Give grace and glory to the Nereid Queen. 

So purposed he, of all Gods mightiest. 
But now between the city and Hellespont 
Were Greeks and Trojans burning men and steeds 
In battle slain, while paused the murderous strife. 
For Priam sent his herald Menoetes forth 
To Agamemnon and the Achaean chiefs, 
Asking a truce wherein to burn the dead; 
And they, of reverence for the slain, gave ear; 
For wrath pursueth not the dead. And when 
They had lain their slain on those close-thronging pyres,

Then did the Argives to their tents return, 
And unto Priam's gold-abounding halls 
The Trojans, for Eurypylus sorrowing sore: 
For even as Priam's sons they honoured him. 
Therefore apart from all the other slain, 
Before the Gate Dardanian -- where the streams 
Of eddying Xanthus down from Ida flow 
Fed by the rains of heavens -- they buried him. 

Aweless Achilles' son the while went forth 
To his sire's huge tomb. Outpouring tears, he kissed 
The tall memorial pillar of the dead, 
And groaning clasped it round, and thus he cried: 
"Hail, father! Though beneath the earth thou lie 
In Hades' halls, I shall forget thee not. 
Oh to have met thee living mid the host! 
Then of each other had our souls had joy, 
Then of her wealth had we spoiled Ilium. 
But now, thou hast not seen thy child, nor I 
Seen thee, who yearned to look on thee in life. 
Yet, though thou be afar amidst the dead, 
Thy spear, thy son, have made thy foes to quail; 
And Danaans with exceeding joy behold 
One like to thee in stature, fame and deeds." 

He spake, and wiped the hot tears from his face; 
And to his father's ships passed swiftly thence: 
With him went Myrmidon warriors two and ten, 
And white-haired Phoenix followed on with these 
Woefully sighing for the glorious dead. 

Night rose o'er earth, the stars flashed out in heaven; 
So these brake bread, and slept till woke the Dawn. 
Then the Greeks donned their armour: flashed afar 
Its splendour up to the very firmament. 
Forth of their gates in one great throng they poured, 
Like snowflakes thick and fast, which drift adown 
Heavily from the clouds in winter's cold; 
So streamed they forth before the wall, and rose 
Their dread shout: groaned the deep earth 'neath their tramp.

The Trojans heard that shout, and saw that host, 
And marvelled. Crushed with fear were all their hearts 
Foreboding doom; for like a huge cloud seemed 
That throng of foes: with clashing arms they came: 
Volumed and vast the dust rose 'neath their feet. 
Then either did some God with hardihood thrill 
Deiphobus' heart, and made it void of fear, 
Or his own spirit spurred him on to fight, 
To drive by thrust of spear that terrible host 
Of foemen from the city of his birth. 
So there in Troy he cried with heartening speech: 
"O friends, be stout of heart to play the men! 
Remember all the agonies that war 
Brings in the end to them that yield to foes. 
Ye wrestle not for Alexander alone, 
Nor Helen, but for home, for your own lives, 
For wives, for little ones, for parents grey, 
For all the grace of life, for all ye have, 
For this dear land -- oh may she shroud me o'er 
Slain in the battle, ere I see her lie 
'Neath foemen's spears -- my country! I know not 
A bitterer pang than this for hapless men! 
O be ye strong for battle! Forth to the fight 
With me, and thrust this horror far away! 
Think not Achilles liveth still to war 
Against us: him the ravening fire consumed. 
Some other Achaean was it who so late 
Enkindled them to war. Oh, shame it were 
If men who fight for fatherland should fear 
Achilles' self, or any Greek beside! 
Let us not flinch from war-toil! have we not 
Endured much battle-travail heretofore? 
What, know ye not that to men sorely tried 
Prosperity and joyance follow toil? 
So after scourging winds and ruining storms 
Zeus brings to men a morn of balmy air; 
After disease new strength comes, after war 
Peace: all things know Time's changeless law of change."

Then eager all for war they armed themselves 
In haste. All through the town rang clangour of arms 
As for grim fight strong men arrayed their limbs. 
Here stood a wife, shuddering with dread of war, 
Yet piling, as she wept, her husband's arms 
Before his feet. There little children brought 
To a father his war-gear with eager haste; 
And now his heart was wrung to hear their sobs, 
And now he smiled on those small ministers, 
And stronger waxed his heart's resolve to fight 
To the last gasp for these, the near and dear. 
Yonder again, with hands that had not lost 
Old cunning, a grey father for the fray 
Girded a son, and murmured once and again: 
"Dear boy, yield thou to no man in the war!" 
And showed his son the old scars on his breast, 
Proud memories of fights fought long ago. 

So when they all stood mailed in battle-gear, 
Forth of the gates they poured all eager-souled 
For war. Against the chariots of the Greeks 
Their chariots charged; their ranks of footmen pressed 
To meet the footmen of the foe. The earth 
Rang to the tramp of onset; pealed the cheer 
From man to man; swift closed the fronts of war. 
Loud clashed their arms all round; from either side 
War-cries were mingled in one awful roar 
Swift-winged full many a dart and arrow flew 
From host to host; loud clanged the smitten shields 
'Neath thrusting spears. neath javelin-point and sword: 
Men hewed with battle-axes lightening down; 
Crimson the armour ran with blood of men. 
And all this while Troy's wives and daughters watched 
From high walls that grim battle of the strong. 
All trembled as they prayed for husbands, sons, 
And brothers: white-haired sires amidst them sat, 
And gazed, while anguished fear for sons devoured 
Their hearts. But Helen in her bower abode 
Amidst her maids, there held by utter shame. 

So without pause before the wall they fought, 
While Death exulted o'er them; deadly Strife 
Shrieked out a long wild cry from host to host. 
With blood of slain men dust became red mire: 
Here, there, fast fell the warriors mid the fray. 

Then slew Deiphobus the charioteer 
Of Nestor, Hippasus' son: from that high car 
Down fell he 'midst the dead; fear seized his lord 
Lest, while his hands were cumbered with the reins, 
He too by Priam's strong son might be slain. 
Melanthius marked his plight: swiftly he sprang 
Upon the car; he urged the horses on, 
Shaking the reins, goading them with his spear, 
Seeing the scourge was lost. But Priam's son 
Left these, and plunged amid a throng of foes. 
There upon many he brought the day of doom; 
For like a ruining tempest on he stormed 
Through reeling ranks. His mighty hand struck down 
Foes numberless: the plain was heaped with dead. 

As when a woodman on the long-ridged hills 
Plunges amid the forest-depths, and hews 
With might and main, and fells sap-laden trees 
To make him store of charcoal from the heaps 
Of billets overturfed and set afire: 
The trunks on all sides fallen strew the slopes, 
While o'er his work the man exulteth; so 
Before Deiphobus' swift death-dealing hands 
In heaps the Achaeans each on other fell. 
The charging lines of Troy swept over some; 
Some fled to Xanthus' stream: Deiphobus chased 
Into the flood yet more, and slew and slew. 
As when on fish-abounding Hellespont's strand 
The fishermen hard-straining drag a net 
Forth of the depths to land; but, while it trails 
Yet through the sea, one leaps amid the waves 
Grasping in hand a sinuous-headed spear 
To deal the sword-fish death, and here and there, 
Fast as he meets them, slays them, and with blood 
The waves are reddened; so were Xanthus' streams 
Impurpled by his hands, and choked with dead. 

Yet not without sore loss the Trojans fought; 
For all this while Peleides' fierce-heart son 
Of other ranks made havoc. Thetis gazed 
Rejoicing in her son's son, with a joy 
As great as was her grief for Achilles slain. 
For a great host beneath his spear were hurled 
Down to the dust, steeds, warriors slaughter-blent. 
And still he chased, and still he slew: he smote 
Amides war-renowned, who on his steed 
Bore down on him, but of his horsemanship 
Small profit won. The bright spear pierced him through 
From navel unto spine, and all his bowels 
Gushed out, and deadly Doom laid hold on him 
Even as he fell beside his horse's feet. 
Ascanius and Oenops next he slew; 
Under the fifth rib of the one he drave 
His spear, the other stabbed he 'neath the throat 
Where a wound bringeth surest doom to man. 
Whomso he met besides he slew -- the names 
What man could tell of all that by the hands 
Of Neoptolemus died? Never his limbs 
Waxed weary. As some brawny labourer, 
With strong hands toiling in a fruitful field 
The livelong day, rains down to earth the fruit 
Of olives, swiftly beating with his pole, 
And with the downfall covers all the ground, 
So fast fell 'neath his hands the thronging foe. 

Elsewhere did Agamemnon, Tydeus' son, 
And other chieftains of the Danaans toil 
With fury in the fight. Yet never quailed 
The mighty men of Troy: with heart and soul 
They also fought, and ever stayed from flight 
Such as gave back. Yet many heeded not 
Their chiefs, but fled, cowed by the Achaeans' might. 

Now at the last Achilles' strong son marked 
How fast beside Scamander's outfall Greeks 
Were perishing. Those Troyward-fleeing foes 
Whom he had followed slaying, left he now, 
And bade Automedon thither drive, where hosts 
Were falling of the Achaeans. Straightway he 
Hearkened, and scourged the steeds immortal on 
To that wild fray: bearing their lord they flew 
Swiftly o'er battle-highways paved with death. 

As Ares chariot-borne to murderous war 
Fares forth, and round his onrush quakes the ground, 
While on the God's breast clash celestial arms 
Outflashing fire, so charged Achilles' son 
Against Deiphobus. Clouds of dust upsoared 
About his horses' feet. Automedon marked 
The Trojan chief, and knew him. To his lord 
Straightway he named that hero war-renowned: 
"My king, this is Deiphobus' array -- 
The man who from thy father fled in fear. 
Some God or fiend with courage fills him now." 

Naught answered Neoptolemus, save to bid 
Drive on the steeds yet faster, that with speed 
He might avert grim death from perishing friends. 
But when to each other now full nigh they drew, 
Deiphobus, despite his battle-lust, 
Stayed, as a ravening fire stays when it meets 
Water. He marvelled, seeing Achilles' steeds 
And that gigantic son, huge as his sire; 
And his heart wavered, choosing now to flee, 
And now to face that hero, man to man 
As when a mountain boar from his young brood 
Chases the jackals -- then a lion leaps 
From hidden ambush into view: the boar 
Halts in his furious onset, loth to advance, 
Loth to retreat, while foam his jaws about 
His whetted tusks; so halted Priam's son 
Car-steeds and car, perplexed, while quivered his hands 
About the lance. Shouted Achilles' son: 
"Ho, Priam's son, why thus so mad to smite 
Those weaker Argives, who have feared thy wrath 
And fled thine onset? So thou deem'st thyself 
Far mightiest! If thine heart be brave indeed, 
Of my spear now make trial in the strife." 

On rushed he, as a lion against a stag, 
Borne by the steeds and chariot of his sire. 
And now full soon his lance had slain his foe, 
Him and his charioteer -- but Phoebus poured 
A dense cloud round him from the viewless heights 
Of heaven, and snatched him from the deadly fray, 
And set him down in Troy, amid the rout 
Of fleeing Trojans: so did Peleus' son 
Stab but the empty air; and loud he cried: 
"Dog, thou hast 'scaped my wrath! No might of thine 
Saved thee, though ne'er so fain! Some God hath cast 
Night's veil o'er thee, and snatched thee from thy death."

Then Cronos' Son dispersed that dense dark cloud: 
Mist-like it thinned and vanished into air: 
Straightway the plain and all the land were seen. 
Then far away about the Scaean Gate 
He saw the Trojans: seeming like his sire, 
He sped against them; they at his coming quailed. 
As shipmen tremble when a wild wave bears 
Down on their bark, wind-heaved until it swings 
Broad, mountain-high above them, when the sea 
Is mad with tempest; so, as on he came, 
Terror clad all those Trojans as a cloak, 
The while he shouted, cheering on his men: 
"Hear, friends! -- fill full your hearts with dauntless strength,

The strength that well beseemeth mighty men 
Who thirst to win them glorious victory, 
To win renown from battle's tumult! Come, 
Brave hearts, now strive we even beyond our strength 
Till we smite Troy's proud city, till we win 
Our hearts' desire! Foul shame it were to abide 
Long deedless here and strengthless, womanlike! 
Ere I be called war-blencher, let me die!" 

Then unto Ares' work their spirits flamed. 
Down on the Trojans charged they: yea, and these 
Fought with high courage, round their city now, 
And now from wall and gate-towers. Never lulled 
The rage of war, while Trojan hearts were hot 
To hurl the foemen back, and the strong Greeks 
To smite the town: grim havoc compassed all. 

Then, eager for the Trojans' help, swooped down 
Out of Olympus, cloaked about with clouds, 
The son of Leto. Mighty rushing winds 
Bare him in golden armour clad; and gleamed 
With lightning-splendour of his descent the long 
Highways of air. His quiver clashed; loud rang 
The welkin; earth re-echoed, as he set 
His tireless feet by Xanthus. Pealed his shout 
Dreadly, with courage filling them of Troy, 
Scaring their foes from biding the red fray. 
But of all this the mighty Shaker of Earth 
Was ware: he breathed into the fainting 
Greeks Fierce valour, and the fight waxed murderous 
Through those Immortals' clashing wills. Then died 
Hosts numberless on either side. In wrath 
Apollo thought to smite Achilles' son 
In the same place where erst he smote his sire; 
But birds of boding screamed to left, to stay 
His mood, and other signs from heaven were sent; 
Yet was his wrath not minded to obey 
Those portents. Swiftly drew Earth-shaker nigh 
In mist celestial cloaked: about his feet 
Quaked the dark earth as came the Sea-king on. 
Then, to stay Phoebus' hand, he cried to him: 
"Refrain thy wrath: Achilles' giant son 
Slay not! Olympus' Lord himself shall be 
Wroth for his death, and bitter grief shall light 
On me and all the Sea-gods, as erstwhile 
For Achilles' sake. Nay, get thee back to heights 
Celestial, lest thou kindle me to wrath, 
And so I cleave a sudden chasm in earth, 
And Ilium and all her walls go down 
To darkness. Thine own soul were vexed thereat." 

Then, overawed by the brother of his sire, 
And fearing for Troy's fate and for her folk, 
To heaven went back Apollo, to the sea 
Poseidon. But the sons of men fought on, 
And slew; and Strife incarnate gloating watched. 

At last by Calchas' counsel Achaea's sons 
Drew back to the ships, and put from them the thought 
Of battle, seeing it was not foreordained 
That Ilium should fall until the might 
Of war-wise Philoctetes came to aid 
The Achaean host. This had the prophet learnt. 
From birds of prosperous omen, or had read 
In hearts of victims. Wise in prophecy-lore 
Was he, and like a God knew things to be. 

Trusting in him, the sons of Atreus stayed 
Awhile the war, and unto Lemnos, land 
Of stately mansions, sent they Tydeus' son 
And battle-staunch Odysseus oversea. 
Fast by the Fire-god's city sped they on 
Over the broad flood of the Aegean Sea 
To vine-clad Lemnos, where in far-off days 
The wives wreaked murderous vengeance on their lords, 
In fierce wrath that they gave them not their due, 
But couched beside the handmaid-thralls of Thrace, 
The captives of their spears when they laid waste 
The land of warrior Thracians. Then these wives, 
Their hearts with fiery jealousy's fever filled, 
Murdered in every home with merciless hands 
Their husbands: no compassion would they show 
To their own wedded lords -- such madness shakes 
The heart of man or woman, when it burns 
With jealousy's fever, stung by torturing pangs. 
So with souls filled with desperate hardihood 
In one night did they slaughter all their lords; 
And on a widowed nation rose the sun. 

To hallowed Lemnos came those heroes twain; 
They marked the rocky cave where lay the son 
Of princely Poeas. Horror came on them 
When they beheld the hero of their quest 
Groaning with bitter pangs, on the hard earth 
Lying, with many feathers round him strewn, 
And others round his body, rudely sewn 
Into a cloak, a screen from winter's cold. 
For, oft as famine stung him, would he shoot 
The shaft that missed no fowl his aim had doomed. 
Their flesh he ate, their feathers vestured him. 
And there lay herbs and healing leaves, the which, 
Spread on his deadly wound, assuaged its pangs. 
Wild tangled elf-locks hung about his head. 
He seemed a wild beast, that hath set its foot, 
Prowling by night, upon a hidden trap, 
And so hath been constrained in agony 
To bite with fierce teeth through the prisoned limb 
Ere it could win back to its cave, and there 
In hunger and torturing pains it languisheth. 
So in that wide cave suffering crushed the man; 
And all his frame was wasted: naught but skin 
Covered his bones. Unwashen there he crouched 
With famine-haggard cheeks, with sunken eyes 
Glaring his misery 'neath cavernous brows. 
Never his groaning ceased, for evermore 
The ulcerous black wound, eating to the bone, 
Festered with thrills of agonizing pain. 
As when a beetling cliff, by seething seas 
Aye buffeted, is carved and underscooped, 
For all its stubborn strength, by tireless waves, 
Till, scourged by winds and lashed by tempest-flails, 
The sea into deep caves hath gnawed its base; 
So greater 'neath his foot grew evermore 
The festering wound, dealt when the envenomed fangs 
Tare him of that fell water-snake, which men 
Say dealeth ghastly wounds incurable, 
When the hot sun hath parched it as it crawls 
Over the sands; and so that mightiest man 
Lay faint and wasted with his cureless pain; 
And from the ulcerous wound aye streamed to earth 
Fetid corruption fouling all the floor 
Of that wide cave, a marvel to be heard 
Of men unborn. Beside his stony bed 
Lay a long quiver full of arrows, some 
For hunting, some to smite his foes withal; 
With deadly venom of that fell water-snake 
Were these besmeared. Before it, nigh to his hand, 
Lay the great bow, with curving tips of horn, 
Wrought by the mighty hands of Hercules. 

Now when that solitary spied these twain 
Draw nigh his cave, he sprang to his bow, he laid 
The deadly arrow on the string; for now 
Fierce memory of his wrongs awoke against 
These, who had left him years agone, in pain 
Groaning upon the desolate sea-shore. 
Yea, and his heart's stem will he had swiftly wrought, 
But, even as upon that godlike twain 
He gazed, Athena caused his bitter wrath 
To melt away. Then drew they nigh to him 
With looks of sad compassion, and sat down 
On either hand beside him in the cave, 
And of his deadly wound and grievous pangs 
Asked; and he told them all his sufferings. 
And they spake hope and comfort; and they said: 
"Thy woeful wound, thine anguish, shall be healed, 
If thou but come with us to Achaea's host -- 
The host that now is sorrowing after thee 
With all its kings. And no man of them all 
Was cause of thine affliction, but the Fates, 
The cruel ones, whom none that walk the earth 
Escape, but aye they visit hapless men 
Unseen; and day by day with pitiless hearts 
Now they afflict men, now again exalt 
To honour -- none knows why; for all the woes 
And all the joys of men do these devise 
After their pleasure." Hearkening he sat 
To Odysseus and to godlike Diomede; 
And all the hoarded wrath for olden wrongs 
And all the torturing rage, melted away. 

Straight to the strand dull-thundering and the ship, 
Laughing for joy, they bare him with his bow. 
There washed they all his body and that foul wound 
With sponges, and with plenteous water bathed: 
So was his soul refreshed. Then hasted they 
And made meat ready for the famished man, 
And in the galley supped with him. Then came 
The balmy night, and sleep slid down on them. 
Till rose the dawn they tarried by the strand 
Of sea-girt Lemnos, but with dayspring cast 
The hawsers loose, and heaved the anchor-stones 
Out of the deep. Athena sent a breeze 
Blowing behind the galley taper-prowed. 
They strained the sail with either stern-sheet taut; 
Seaward they pointed the stout-girdered ship; 
O'er the broad flood she leapt before the wind; 
Broken to right and left the dark wave sighed, 
And seething all around was hoary foam, 
While thronging dolphins raced on either hand 
Flashing along the paths of silver sea. 

Full soon to fish-fraught Hellespont they came 
And the far-stretching ships. Glad were the Greeks 
To see the longed-for faces. Forth the ship 
With joy they stepped; and Poeas' valiant son 
On those two heroes leaned thin wasted hands, 
Who bare him painfully halting to the shore 
Staying his weight upon their brawny arms. 
As seems mid mountain-brakes an oak or pine 
By strength of the woodcutter half hewn through, 
Which for a little stands on what was left 
Of the smooth trunk by him who hewed thereat 
Hard by the roots, that its slow-smouldering wood 
Might yield him pitch -- now like to one in pain 
It groans, in weakness borne down by the wind, 
Yet is upstayed upon its leafy boughs 
Which from the earth bear up its helpless weight; 
So by pain unendurable bowed down 
Leaned he on those brave heroes, and was borne 
Unto the war-host. Men beheld, and all 
Compassionated that great archer, crushed 
By anguish of his hurt. But one drew near, 
Podaleirius, godlike in his power to heal. 
Swifter than thought he made him whole and sound; 
For deftly on the wound he spread his salves, 
Calling on his physician-father's name; 
And soon the Achaeans shouted all for joy, 
All praising with one voice Asclepius' son. 
Lovingly then they bathed him, and with oil 
Anointed. All his heaviness of cheer 
And misery vanished by the Immortals' will; 
And glad at heart were all that looked on him; 
And from affliction he awoke to joy. 
Over the bloodless face the flush of health 
Glowed, and for wretched weakness mighty strength 
Thrilled through him: goodly and great waxed all his limbs.

As when a field of corn revives again 
Which erst had drooped, by rains of ruining storm 
Down beaten flat, but by warm summer winds 
Requickened, o'er the laboured land it smiles, 
So Philoctetes' erstwhile wasted frame 
Was all requickened: -- in the galley's hold 
He seemed to have left all cares that crushed his soul. 

And Atreus' sons beheld him marvelling 
As one re-risen from the dead: it seemed 
The work of hands immortal. And indeed 
So was it verily, as their hearts divined; 
For 'twas the glorious Trito-born that shed 
Stature and grace upon him. Suddenly 
He seemed as when of old mid Argive men 
He stood, before calamity struck him down. 
Then unto wealthy Agamemnon's tent 
Did all their mightiest men bring Poeas' son, 
And set him chief in honour at the feast, 
Extolling him. When all with meat and drink 
Were filled, spake Agamemnon lord of spears: 
"Dear friend, since by the will of Heaven our souls 
Were once perverted, that in sea-girt Lemnos 
We left thee, harbour not thine heart within 
Fierce wrath for this: by the blest Gods constrained 
We did it; and, I trow, the Immortals willed 
To bring much evil on us, bereft of thee, 
Who art of all men skilfullest to quell 
With shafts of death all foes that face thee in fight. 
For all the tangled paths of human life, 
By land and sea, are by the will of Fate 
Hid from our eyes, in many and devious tracks 
Are cleft apart, in wandering mazes lost. 
Along them men by Fortune's dooming drift 
Like unto leaves that drive before the wind. 
Oft on an evil path the good man's feet 
Stumble, the brave finds not a prosperous path; 
And none of earth-born men can shun the Fates, 
And of his own will none can choose his way. 
So then doth it behove the wise of heart 
Though on a troublous track the winds of fate 
Sweep him away to suffer and be strong. 
Since we were blinded then, and erred herein, 
With rich gifts will we make amends to thee 
Hereafter, when we take the stately towers 
Of Troy: but now receive thou handmaids seven, 
Fleet steeds two-score, victors in chariot-race, 
And tripods twelve, wherein thine heart may joy 
Through all thy days; and always in my tent 
Shall royal honour at the feast be thine." 

He spake, and gave the hero those fair gifts. 
Then answered Poeas' mighty-hearted son; 
"Friend, I forgive thee freely, and all beside 
Whoso against me haply hath trangressed. 
I know how good men's minds sometimes be warped: 
Nor meet it is that one be obdurate 
Ever, and nurse mean rancours: sternest wrath 
Must yield anon unto the melting mood. 
Now pass we to our rest; for better is sleep 
Than feasting late, for him who longs to fight." 

He spake, and rose, and came to his comrades' tent; 
Then swiftly for their war-fain king they dight 
The couch, while laughed their hearts for very joy. 
Gladly he laid him down to sleep till dawn. 

So passed the night divine, till flushed the hills 
In the sun's light, and men awoke to toil. 
Then all athirst for war the Argive men 
'Gan whet the spear smooth-shafted, or the dart, 
Or javelin, and they brake the bread of dawn, 
And foddered all their horses. Then to these 
Spake Poeas' son with battle-kindling speech: 
"Up! let us make us ready for the war! 
Let no man linger mid the galleys, ere 
The glorious walls of Ilium stately-towered 
Be shattered, and her palaces be burned!" 

Then at his words each heart and spirit glowed: 
They donned their armour, and they grasped their shields.

Forth of the ships in one huge mass they poured 
Arrayed with bull-hide bucklers, ashen spears, 
And gallant-crested helms. Through all their ranks 
Shoulder to shoulder marched they: thou hadst seen 
No gap 'twixt man and man as on they charged; 
So close they thronged, so dense was their array. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK X

How Paris Was Stricken To Death, and in Vain Sought Help of Oenone

Now were the Trojans all without the town 
Of Priam, armour-clad, with battle-cars 
And chariot-steeds; for still they burnt their dead, 
And still they feared lest the Achaean men 
Should fall on them. They looked, and saw them come 
With furious speed against the walls. In haste 
They cast a hurried earth-mound o'er the slain, 
For greatly trembled they to see their foes. 
Then in their sore disquiet spake to them 
Polydamas, a wise and prudent chief: 
"Friends, unendurably against us now 
Maddens the war. Go to, let us devise 
How we may find deliverance from our strait. 
Still bide the Danaans here, still gather strength: 
Now therefore let us man our stately towers, 
And thence withstand them, fighting night and day, 
Until yon Danaans weary, and return 
To Sparta, or, renownless lingering here 
Beside the wall, lose heart. No strength of theirs 
Shall breach the long walls, howsoe'er they strive, 
For in the imperishable work of Gods 
Weakness is none. Food, drink, we shall not lack, 
For in King Priam's gold-abounding halls 
Is stored abundant food, that shall suffice 
For many more than we, through many years, 
Though thrice so great a host at our desire 
Should gather, eager to maintain our cause." 

Then chode with him Anchises' valiant son: 
"Polydamas, wherefore do they call thee wise, 
Who biddest suffer endless tribulations 
Cooped within walls? Never, how long soe'er 
The Achaeans tarry here, will they lose heart; 
But when they see us skulking from the field, 
More fiercely will press on. So ours shall be 
The sufferance, perishing in our native home, 
If for long season they beleaguer us. 
No food, if we be pent within our walls, 
Shall Thebe send us, nor Maeonia wine, 
But wretchedly by famine shall we die, 
Though the great wall stand firm. Nay, though our lot 
Should be to escape that evil death and doom, 
And not by famine miserably to die; 
Yet rather let us fight in armour clad 
For children and grey fathers! Haply Zeus 
Will help us yet; of his high blood are we. 
Nay, even though we be abhorred of him, 
Better straightway to perish gloriously 
Fighting unto the last for fatherland, 
Than die a death of lingering agony!" 

Shouted they all who heard that gallant rede. 
Swiftly with helms and shields and spears they stood 
In close array. The eyes of mighty Zeus 
From heaven beheld the Trojans armed for fight 
Against the Danaans: then did he awake 
Courage in these and those, that there might be 
Strain of unflinching fight 'twixt host and host. 
That day was Paris doomed, for Helen's sake 
Fighting, by Philoctetes' hands to die. 

To one place Strife incarnate drew them all, 
The fearful Battle-queen, beheld of none, 
But cloaked in clouds blood-raining: on she stalked 
Swelling the mighty roar of battle, now 
Rushed through Troy's squadrons, through Achaea's now; 
Panic and Fear still waited on her steps 
To make their father's sister glorious. 
From small to huge that Fury's stature grew; 
Her arms of adamant were blood-besprent, 
The deadly lance she brandished reached the sky. 
Earth quaked beneath her feet: dread blasts of fire 
Flamed from her mouth: her voice pealed thunder-like 
Kindling strong men. Swift closed the fronts of fight 
Drawn by a dread Power to the mighty work. 
Loud as the shriek of winds that madly blow 
In early spring, when the tall woodland trees 
Put forth their leaves -- loud as the roar of fire 
Blazing through sun-scorched brakes -- loud as the voice

Of many waters, when the wide sea raves 
Beneath the howling blast, with thunderous crash 
Of waves, when shake the fearful shipman's knees; 
So thundered earth beneath their charging feet. 
Strife swooped on them: foe hurled himself on foe. 

First did Aeneas of the Danaans slay 
Harpalion, Arizelus' scion, born 
In far Boeotia of Amphinome, 
Who came to Troy to help the Argive men 
With godlike Prothoenor. 'Neath his waist 
Aeneas stabbed, and reft sweet life from him. 
Dead upon him he cast Thersander's son, 
For the barbed javelin pierced through Hyllus' throat 
Whom Arethusa by Lethaeus bare 
In Crete: sore grieved Idomeneus for his fall. 

By this Peleides' son had swiftly slain 
Twelve Trojan warriors with his father's spear. 
First Cebrus fell, Harmon, Pasitheus then, 
Hysminus, Schedius, and Imbrasius, 
Phleges, Mnesaeus, Ennomus, Amphinous, 
Phasis, Galenus last, who had his home 

By Gargarus' steep -- a mighty warrior he 
Among Troy's mighties: with a countless host 
To Troy he came: for Priam Dardanus' son 
Promised him many gifts and passing fair. 
Ah fool! his own doom never he foresaw, 
Whose weird was suddenly to fall in fight 
Ere he bore home King Priam's glorious gifts. 

Doom the Destroyer against the Argives sped 
Valiant Aeneas' friend, Eurymenes. 
Wild courage spurred him on, that he might slay 
Many -- and then fill death's cup for himself. 
Man after man he slew like some fierce beast, 
And foes shrank from the terrible rage that burned 
On his life's verge, nor reeked of imminent doom. 
Yea, peerless deeds in that fight had he done, 
Had not his hands grown weary, his spear-head 
Bent utterly: his sword availed him not, 
Snapped at the hilt by Fate. Then Meges' dart 
Smote 'neath his ribs; blood spurted from his mouth, 
And in death's agony Doom stood at his side. 

Even as he fell, Epeius' henchmen twain, 
Deileon and Amphion, rushed to strip 
His armour; but Aeneas brave and strong 
Chilled their hot hearts in death beside the dead. 
As one in latter summer 'mid his vines 
Kills wasps that dart about his ripening grapes, 
And so, ere they may taste the fruit, they die; 
So smote he them, ere they could seize the arms. 

Menon and Amphinous Tydeides slew, 
Both goodly men. Paris slew Hippasus' son 
Demoleon, who in Laconia's land 
Beside the outfall of Eurotas dwelt, 
The stream deep-flowing, and to Troy he came 
With Menelaus. Under his right breast 
The shaft of Paris smote him unto death, 
Driving his soul forth like a scattering breath. 

Teucer slew Zechis, Medon's war-famed son, 
Who dwelt in Phrygia, land of myriad flocks, 
Below that haunted cave of fair-haired Nymphs 
Where, as Endymion slept beside his kine, 
Divine Selene watched him from on high, 
And slid from heaven to earth; for passionate love 
Drew down the immortal stainless Queen of Night. 
And a memorial of her couch abides 
Still 'neath the oaks; for mid the copses round 
Was poured out milk of kine; and still do men 
Marvelling behold its whiteness. Thou wouldst say 
Far off that this was milk indeed, which is 
A well-spring of white water: if thou draw 
A little nigher, lo, the stream is fringed 
As though with ice, for white stone rims it round. 

Rushed on Alcaeus Meges, Phyleus' son, 
And drave his spear beneath his fluttering heart. 
Loosed were the cords of sweet life suddenly, 
And his sad parents longed in vain to greet 
That son returning from the woeful war 
To Margasus and Phyllis lovely-girt, 
Dwellers by lucent streams of Harpasus, 
Who pours the full blood of his clamorous flow 
Into Maeander madly rushing aye. 

With Glaucus' warrior-comrade Scylaceus 
Odeus' son closed in the fight, and stabbed 
Over the shield-rim, and the cruel spear 
Passed through his shoulder, and drenched his shield with blood.

Howbeit he slew him not, whose day of doom 
Awaited him afar beside the wall 
Of his own city; for when Illium's towers 
Were brought low by that swift avenging host 
Fleeing the war to Lycia then he came 
Alone; and when he drew nigh to the town, 
The thronging women met and questioned him 
Touching their sons and husbands; and he told 
How all were dead. They compassed him about, 
And stoned the man with great stones, that he died. 
So had he no joy of his winning home, 
But the stones muffled up his dying groans, 
And of the same his ghastly tomb was reared 
Beside Bellerophon's grave and holy place 
In Tlos, nigh that far-famed Chimaera's Crag. 
Yet, though he thus fulfilled his day of doom, 
As a God afterward men worshipped him 
By Phoebus' hest, and never his honour fades. 

Now Poeas' son the while slew Deioneus 
And Acamas, Antenor's warrior son: 
Yea, a great host of strong men laid he low. 
On, like the War-god, through his foes he rushed, 
Or as a river roaring in full flood 
Breaks down long dykes, when, maddening round its rocks,

Down from the mountains swelled by rain it pours 
An ever-flowing mightily-rushing stream 
Whose foaming crests over its forelands sweep; 
So none who saw him even from afar 
Dared meet renowned Poeas' valiant son, 
Whose breast with battle-fury was fulfilled, 
Whose limbs were clad in mighty Hercules' arms 
Of cunning workmanship; for on the belt 
Gleamed bears most grim and savage, jackals fell, 
And panthers, in whose eyes there seems to lurk 
A deadly smile. There were fierce-hearted wolves, 
And boars with flashing tusks, and mighty lions 
All seeming strangely alive; and, there portrayed 
Through all its breadth, were battles murder-rife. 
With all these marvels covered was the belt; 
And with yet more the quiver was adorned. 
There Hermes was, storm-footed Son of Zeus, 
Slaying huge Argus nigh to Inachus' streams, 
Argus, whose sentinel eyes in turn took sleep. 
And there was Phaethon from the Sun-car hurled 
Into Eridanus. Earth verily seemed 
Ablaze, and black smoke hovered on the air. 
There Perseus slew Medusa gorgon-eyed 
By the stars' baths and utmost bounds of earth 
And fountains of deep-flowing Ocean, where 
Night in the far west meets the setting sun. 
There was the Titan Iapetus' great son 
Hung from the beetling crag of Caucasus 
In bonds of adamant, and the eagle tare 
His liver unconsumed -- he seemed to groan! 
All these Hephaestus' cunning hands had wrought 
For Hercules; and these to Poeas' son, 
Most near of friends and dear, he gave to bear. 

So glorying in those arms he smote the foe. 
But Paris at the last to meet him sprang 
Fearlessly, bearing in his hands his bow 
And deadly arrows -- but his latest day 
Now met himself. A flying shaft he sped 
Forth from the string, which sang as leapt the dart, 
Which flew not vainly: yet the very mark 
It missed, for Philoctetes swerved aside 
A hair-breadth, and it smote above the breast 
Cleodorus war-renowned, and cleft a path 
Clear through his shoulder; for he had not now 
The buckler broad which wont to fence from death 
Its bearer, but was falling back from fight, 
Being shieldless; for Polydamas' massy lance 
Had cleft the shoulder-belt whereby his targe 
Hung, and he gave back therefore, fighting still 
With stubborn spear. But now the arrow of death 
Fell on him, as from ambush leaping forth. 
For so Fate willed, I trow, to bring dread doom 
On noble-hearted Lernus' scion, born 
Of Amphiale, in Rhodes the fertile land. 

But soon as Poeas' battle-eager son 
Marked him by Paris' deadly arrow slain, 
Swiftly he strained his bow, shouting aloud: 
"Dog! I will give thee death, will speed thee down 
To the Unseen Land, who darest to brave me! 
And so shall they have rest, who travail now 
For thy vile sake. Destruction shall have end 
When thou art dead, the author of our bane." 

Then to his breast he drew the plaited cord. 
The great bow arched, the merciless shaft was aimed 
Straight, and the terrible point a little peered 
Above the bow, in that constraining grip. 
Loud sang the string, as the death-hissing shaft 
Leapt, and missed not: yet was not Paris' heart 
Stilled, but his spirit yet was strong in him; 
For that first arrow was not winged with death: 
It did but graze the fair flesh by his wrist. 
Then once again the avenger drew the bow, 
And the barbed shaft of Poeas' son had plunged, 
Ere he could swerve, 'twixt flank and groin. No more 
He abode the fight, but swiftly hasted back 
As hastes a dog which on a lion rushed 
At first, then fleeth terror-stricken back. 
So he, his very heart with agony thrilled, 
Fled from the war. Still clashed the grappling hosts, 
Man slaying man: aye bloodier waxed the fray 
As rained the blows: corpse upon corpse was flung 
Confusedly, like thunder-drops, or flakes 
Of snow, or hailstones, by the wintry blast 
At Zeus' behest strewn over the long hills 
And forest-boughs; so by a pitiless doom 
Slain, friends with foes in heaps on heaps were strown. 

Sorely groaned Paris; with the torturing wound 
Fainted his spirit. Leeches sought to allay 
His frenzy of pain. But now drew back to Troy 
The Trojans, and the Danaans to their ships 
Swiftly returned, for dark night put an end 
To strife, and stole from men's limbs weariness, 
Pouring upon their eyes pain-healing sleep. 

But through the livelong night no sleep laid hold 
On Paris: for his help no leech availed, 
Though ne'er so willing, with his salves. His weird 
Was only by Oenone's hands to escape 
Death's doom, if so she willed. Now he obeyed 
The prophecy, and he went -- exceeding loth, 
But grim necessity forced him thence, to face 
The wife forsaken. Evil-boding fowl 
Shrieked o'er his head, or darted past to left, 
Still as he went. Now, as he looked at them, 
His heart sank; now hope whispered, "Haply vain 
Their bodings are!" but on their wings were borne 
Visions of doom that blended with his pain. 
Into Oenone's presence thus he came. 
Amazed her thronging handmaids looked on him 
As at the Nymph's feet that pale suppliant fell 
Faint with the anguish of his wound, whose pangs 
Stabbed him through brain and heart, yea, quivered through

His very bones, for that fierce venom crawled 
Through all his inwards with corrupting fangs; 
And his life fainted in him agony-thrilled. 
As one with sickness and tormenting thirst 
Consumed, lies parched, with heart quick-shuddering, 
With liver seething as in flame, the soul, 
Scarce conscious, fluttering at his burning lips, 
Longing for life, for water longing sore; 
So was his breast one fire of torturing pain. 
Then in exceeding feebleness he spake: 
"O reverenced wife, turn not from me in hate 
For that I left thee widowed long ago! 
Not of my will I did it: the strong Fates 
Dragged me to Helen -- oh that I had died 
Ere I embraced her -- in thine arms had died! 
All, by the Gods I pray, the Lords of Heaven, 
By all the memories of our wedded love, 
Be merciful! Banish my bitter pain: 
Lay on my deadly wound those healing salves 
Which only can, by Fate's decree, remove 
This torment, if thou wilt. Thine heart must speak 
My sentence, to be saved from death or no. 
Pity me -- oh, make haste to pity me! 
This venom's might is swiftly bringing death! 
Heal me, while life yet lingers in my limbs! 
Remember not those pangs of jealousy, 
Nor leave me by a cruel doom to die 
Low fallen at thy feet! This should offend 
The Prayers, the Daughters of the Thunderer Zeus, 
Whose anger followeth unrelenting pride 
With vengeance, and the Erinnys executes 
Their wrath. My queen, I sinned, in folly sinned; 
Yet from death save me -- oh, make haste to save!" 

So prayed he; but her darkly-brooding heart 
Was steeled, and her words mocked his agony: 
"Thou comest unto me! -- thou, who didst leave 
Erewhile a wailing wife in a desolate home! -- 
Didst leave her for thy Tyndarid darling! Go, 
Lie laughing in her arms for bliss! She is better 
Than thy true wife -- is, rumour saith, immortal! 
Make haste to kneel to her but not to me! 
Weep not to me, nor whimper pitiful prayers! 
Oh that mine heart beat with a tigress' strength, 
That I might tear thy flesh and lap thy blood 
For all the pain thy folly brought on me! 
Vile wretch! where now is Love's Queen glory-crowned? 
Hath Zeus forgotten his daughter's paramour? 
Have them for thy deliverers! Get thee hence 
Far from my dwelling, curse of Gods and men! 
Yea, for through thee, thou miscreant, sorrow came 
On deathless Gods, for sons and sons' sons slain. 
Hence from my threshold! -- to thine Helen go! 
Agonize day and night beside her bed: 
There whimper, pierced to the heart with cruel pangs, 
Until she heal thee of thy grievous pain." 

So from her doors she drave that groaning man -- 
Ah fool! not knowing her own doom, whose weird 
Was straightway after him to tread the path 
Of death! So Fate had spun her destiny-thread. 

Then, as he stumbled down through Ida's brakes, 
Where Doom on his death-path was leading him 
Painfully halting, racked with heart-sick pain, 
Hera beheld him, with rejoicing soul 
Throned in the Olympian palace-court of Zeus. 
And seated at her side were handmaids four 
Whom radiant-faced Selene bare to the Sun 
To be unwearying ministers in Heaven, 
In form and office diverse each from each; 
For of these Seasons one was summer's queen, 
And one of winter and his stormy star, 
Of spring the third, of autumn-tide the fourth. 
So in four portions parted is man's year 
Ruled by these Queens in turn -- but of all this 
Be Zeus himself the Overseer in heaven. 
And of those issues now these spake with her 
Which baleful Fate in her all-ruining heart 
Was shaping to the birth the new espousals 
Of Helen, fatal to Deiphobus -- 
The wrath of Helenus, who hoped in vain 
For that fair bride, and how, when he had fled, 
Wroth with the Trojans, to the mountain-height, 
Achaea's sons would seize him and would hale 
Unto their ships -- how, by his counselling 
Strong Tydeus' son should with Odysseus scale 
The great wall, and should slay Alcathous 
The temple-warder, and should bear away 
Pallas the Gracious, with her free consent, 
Whose image was the sure defence of Troy; -- 
Yea, for not even a God, how wroth soe'er, 
Had power to lay the City of Priam waste 
While that immortal shape stood warder there. 
No man had carven that celestial form, 
But Cronos' Son himself had cast it down 
From heaven to Priam's gold-abounding burg. 

Of these things with her handmaids did the Queen 
Of Heaven hold converse, and of many such, 
But Paris, while they talked, gave up the ghost 
On Ida: never Helen saw him more. 
Loud wailed the Nymphs around him; for they still 
Remembered how their nursling wont to lisp 
His childish prattle, compassed with their smiles. 
And with them mourned the neatherds light of foot, 
Sorrowful-hearted; moaned the mountain-glens. 

Then unto travail-burdened Priam's queen 
A herdman told the dread doom of her son. 
Wildly her trembling heart leapt when she heard; 
With failing limbs she sank to earth and wailed: 
"Dead! thou dead, O dear child! Grief heaped on grief 
Hast thou bequeathed me, grief eternal! Best 
Of all my sons, save Hector alone, wast thou! 
While beats my heart, my grief shall weep for thee. 
The hand of Heaven is in our sufferings: 
Some Fate devised our ruin -- oh that I 
Had lived not to endure it, but had died 
In days of wealthy peace! But now I see 
Woes upon woes, and ever look to see 
Worse things -- my children slain, my city sacked 
And burned with fire by stony-hearted foes, 
Daughters, sons' wives, all Trojan women, haled 
Into captivity with our little ones!" 

So wailed she; but the King heard naught thereof, 
But weeping ever sat by Hector's grave, 
For most of all his sons he honoured him, 
His mightiest, the defender of his land. 
Nothing of Paris knew that pierced heart; 
But long and loud lamented Helen; yet 
Those wails were but for Trojan ears; her soul 
With other thoughts was busy, as she cried: 
"Husband, to me, to Troy, and to thyself 
A bitter blow is this thy woeful death! 
In misery hast thou left me, and I look 
To see calamities more deadly yet. 
Oh that the Spirits of the Storm had snatched 
Me from the earth when first I fared with thee 
Drawn by a baleful Fate! It might not be; 
The Gods have meted ruin to thee and me. 
With shuddering horror all men look on me, 
All hate me! Place of refuge is there none 
For me; for if to the Danaan host I fly, 
With torments will they greet me. If I stay, 
Troy's sons and daughters here will compass me 
And rend me. Earth shall cover not my corpse, 
But dogs and fowl of ravin shall devour. 
Oh had Fate slain me ere I saw these woes!" 

So cried she: but for him far less she mourned 
Than for herself, remembering her own sin. 
Yea, and Troy's daughters but in semblance wailed 
For him: of other woes their hearts were full. 
Some thought on parents, some on husbands slain, 
These on their sons, on honoured kinsmen those. 

One only heart was pierced with grief unfeigned, 
Oenone. Not with them of Troy she wailed, 
But far away within that desolate home 
Moaning she lay on her lost husband's bed. 
As when the copses on high mountains stand 
White-veiled with frozen snow, which o'er the glens 
The west-wind blasts have strown, but now the sun 
And east-wind melt it fast, and the long heights 
With water-courses stream, and down the glades 
Slide, as they thaw, the heavy sheets, to swell 
The rushing waters of an ice-cold spring, 
So melted she in tears of anguished pain, 
And for her own, her husband, agonised, 
And cried to her heart with miserable moans: 
"Woe for my wickedness! O hateful life! 
I loved mine hapless husband -- dreamed with him 
To pace to eld's bright threshold hand in hand, 
And heart in heart! The gods ordained not so. 
Oh had the black Fates snatched me from the earth 
Ere I from Paris turned away in hate! 
My living love hath left me! -- yet will I 
Dare to die with him, for I loathe the light." 

So cried she, weeping, weeping piteously, 
Remembering him whom death had swallowed up, 
Wasting, as melteth wax before the flame 
Yet secretly, being fearful lest her sire 
Should mark it, or her handmaids till the night 
Rose from broad Ocean, flooding all the earth 
With darkness bringing men release from toil. 
Then, while her father and her maidens slept, 
She slid the bolts back of the outer doors, 
And rushed forth like a storm-blast. Fast she ran, 
As when a heifer 'mid the mountains speeds, 
Her heart with passion stung, to meet her mate, 
And madly races on with flying feet, 
And fears not, in her frenzy of desire, 
The herdman, as her wild rush bears her on, 
So she but find her mate amid the woods; 
So down the long tracks flew Oenone's feet; 
Seeking the awful pyre, to leap thereon. 
No weariness she knew: as upon wings 
Her feet flew faster ever, onward spurred 
By fell Fate, and the Cyprian Queen. She feared 
No shaggy beast that met her in the dark 
Who erst had feared them sorely -- rugged rock 
And precipice of tangled mountain-slope, 
She trod them all unstumbling; torrent-beds 
She leapt. The white Moon-goddess from on high 
Looked on her, and remembered her own love, 
Princely Endymion, and she pitied her 
In that wild race, and, shining overhead 
In her full brightness, made the long tracks plain. 

Through mountain-gorges so she won to where 
Wailed other Nymphs round Alexander's corpse. 
Roared up about him a great wall of fire; 
For from the mountains far and near had come 
Shepherds, and heaped the death-bale broad and high 
For 1ove's and sorrow's latest service done 
To one of old their comrade and their king. 
Sore weeping stood they round. She raised no wail, 
The broken-hearted, when she saw him there, 
But, in her mantle muffling up her face, 
Leapt on the pyre: loud wailed that multitude. 
There burned she, clasping Paris. All the Nymphs 
Marvelled, beholding her beside her lord 
Flung down, and heart to heart spake whispering: 
"Verily evil-hearted Paris was, 
Who left a leal true wife, and took for bride 
A wanton, to himself and Troy a curse. 
Ah fool, who recked not of the broken heart 
Of a most virtuous wife, who more than life 
Loved him who turned from her and loved her not!" 

So in their hearts the Nymphs spake: but they twain 
Burned on the pyre, never to hail again 
The dayspring. Wondering herdmen stood around, 
As once the thronging Argives marvelling saw 
Evadne clasping mid the fire her lord 
Capaneus, slain by Zeus' dread thunderbolt. 
But when the blast of the devouring fire 
Had made twain one, Oenone and Paris, now 
One little heap of ashes, then with wine 
Quenched they the embers, and they laid their bones 
In a wide golden vase, and round them piled 
The earth-mound; and they set two pillars there 
That each from other ever turn away; 
For the old jealousy in the marble lives. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XI

How the Sons of Troy for the Last Time Fought from Her Walls and
Her Towers 

Troy's daughters mourned within her walls; might none 
Go forth to Paris' tomb, for far away 
From high-built Troy it lay. But the young men 
Without the city toiled unceasingly 
In fight wherein from slaughter rest was none, 
Though dead was Paris; for the Achaeans pressed 
Hard on the Trojans even unto Troy. 
Yet these charged forth -- they could not choose but so,

For Strife and deadly Enyo in their midst 
Stalked, like the fell Erinyes to behold, 
Breathing destruction from their lips like flame. 
Beside them raged the ruthless-hearted Fates 
Fiercely: here Panic-fear and Ares there 
Stirred up the hosts: hard after followed 
Dread With slaughter's gore besprent, that in one host 
Might men see, and be strong, in the other fear; 
And all around were javelins, spears, and darts 
Murder-athirst from this side, that side, showered. 
Aye, as they hurled together, armour clashed, 
As foe with foe grappled in murderous fight. 

There Neoptolemus slew Laodamas, 
Whom Lycia nurtured by fair Xanthus' stream, 
The stream revealed to men by Leto, bride 
Of Thunderer Zeus, when Lycia's stony plain 
Was by her hands uptorn mid agonies 
Of travail-throes wherein she brought to light 
Mid bitter pangs those babes of birth divine. 
Nirus upon him laid he dead; the spear 
Crashed through his jaw, and clear through mouth and tongue

Passed: on the lance's irresistible point 
Shrieking was he impaled: flooded with gore 
His mouth was as he cried. The cruel shaft, 
Sped on by that strong hand, dashed him to earth 
In throes of death. Evenor next he smote 
Above the flank, and onward drave the spear 
Into his liver: swiftly anguished death 
Came upon him. Iphition next he slew: 
He quelled Hippomedon, Hippasus' bold son, 
Whom Ocyone the Nymph had borne beside 
Sangarius' river-flow. Ne'er welcomed she 
Her son's returning face, but ruthless Fate 
With anguish thrilled her of her child bereaved. 

Bremon Aeneas slew, and Andromachus, 
Of Cnossus this, of hallowed Lyctus that: 
On one spot both from their swift chariots fell; 
This gasped for breath, his throat by the long spear 
Transfixed; that other, by a massy stone, 
Sped from a strong hand, on the temple struck, 
Breathed out his life, and black doom shrouded him. 
The startled steeds, bereft of charioteers, 
Fleeing, mid all those corpses were confused, 
And princely Aeneas' henchmen seized on them 
With hearts exulting in the goodly spoil. 

There Philoctetes with his deadly shaft 
Smote Peirasus in act to flee the war: 
The tendons twain behind the knee it snapped, 
And palsied all his speed. A Danaan marked, 
And leapt on that maimed man with sweep of sword 
Shearing his neck through. On the breast of earth 
The headless body fell: the head far flung 
Went rolling with lips parted as to shriek; 
And swiftly fleeted thence the homeless soul. 

Polydamas struck down Eurymachus 
And Cleon with his spear. From Syme came 
With Nireus' following these: cunning were both 
In craft of fisher-folk to east the hook 
Baited with guile, to drop into the sea 
The net, from the boat's prow with deftest hands 
Swiftly and straight to plunge the three-forked spear. 
But not from bane their sea-craft saved them now. 

Eurypylus battle-staunch laid Hellus low, 
Whom Cleito bare beside Gygaea's mere, 
Cleito the fair-cheeked. Face-down in the dust 
Outstretched he lay: shorn by the cruel sword 
From his strong shoulder fell the arm that held 
His long spear. Still its muscles twitched, as though 
Fain to uplift the lance for fight in vain; 
For the man's will no longer stirred therein, 
But aimlessly it quivered, even as leaps 
The severed tail of a snake malignant-eyed, 
Which cannot chase the man who dealt the wound; 
So the right hand of that strong-hearted man 
With impotent grip still clutched the spear for fight. 

Aenus and Polydorus Odysseus slew, 
Ceteians both; this perished by his spear, 
That by his sword death-dealing. Sthenelus 
Smote godlike Abas with a javelin-cast: 
On through his throat and shuddering nape it rushed: 
Stopped were his heart-beats, all his limbs collapsed. 

Tydeides slew Laodocus; Melius fell 
By Agamemnon's hand; Deiphobus 
Smote Alcimus and Dryas: Hippasus, 
How war-renowned soe'er, Agenor slew 
Far from Peneius' river. Crushed by fate, 
Love's nursing-debt to parents ne'er he paid. 

Lamus and stalwart Lyncus Thoas smote, 
And Meriones slew Lycon; Menelaus 
Laid low Archelochus. Upon his home 
Looked down Corycia's ridge, and that great rock 
Of the wise Fire-god, marvellous in men's eyes; 
For thereon, nightlong, daylong, unto him 
Fire blazes, tireless and unquenchable. 
Laden with fruit around it palm-trees grow, 
While mid the stones fire plays about their roots. 
Gods' work is this, a wonder to all time. 

By Teucer princely Hippomedon's son was slain, 
Menoetes: as the archer drew on him, 
Rushed he to smite him; but already hand 
And eye, and bow-craft keen were aiming straight 
On the arching horn the shaft. Swiftly released 
It leapt on the hapless man, while sang the string. 
Stricken full front he heaved one choking gasp, 
Because the fates on the arrow riding flew 
Right to his heart, the throne of thought and strength 
For men, whence short the path is unto death. 

Far from his brawny hand Euryalus hurled 
A massy stone, and shook the ranks of Troy. 
As when in anger against long-screaming cranes 
A watcher of the field leaps from the ground, 
In swift hand whirling round his head the sling, 
And speeds the stone against them, scattering 
Before its hum their ranks far down the wind 
Outspread, and they in huddled panic dart 
With wild cries this way and that, who theretofore 
Swept on in ordered lines; so shrank the foe 
To right and left from that dread bolt of doom 
Hurled of Euryalus. Not in vain it flew 
Fate-winged; it shattered Meles' helm and head 
Down to the eyes: so met him ghastly death. 

Still man slew man, while earth groaned all around, 
As when a mighty wind scourges the land, 
And this way, that way, under its shrieking blasts 
Through the wide woodland bow from the roots and fall 
Great trees, while all the earth is thundering round; 
So fell they in the dust, so clanged their arms, 
So crashed the earth around. Still hot were they 
For fell fight, still dealt bane unto their foes. 

Nigh to Aeneas then Apollo came, 
And to Eurymachus, brave Antenor's son; 
For these against the mighty Achaeans fought 
Shoulder to shoulder, as two strong oxen, matched 
In age, yoked to a wain; nor ever ceased 
From battling. Suddenly spake the God to these 
In Polymestor's shape, the seer his mother 
By Xanthus bare to the Far-darter's priest: 
"Eurymachus, Aeneas, seed of Gods, 
'Twere shame if ye should flinch from Argives! Nay, 
Not Ares' self should joy to encounter you, 
An ye would face him in the fray; for Fate 
Hath spun long destiny-threads for thee and thee." 

He spake, and vanished, mingling with the winds. 
But their hearts felt the God's power: suddenly 
Flooded with boundless courage were their frames, 
Maddened their spirits: on the foe they leapt 
Like furious wasps that in a storm of rage 
Swoop upon bees, beholding them draw nigh 
In latter-summer to the mellowing grapes, 
Or from their hives forth-streaming thitherward; 
So fiercely leapt these sons of Troy to meet 
War-hardened Greeks. The black Fates joyed to see 
Their conflict, Ares laughed, Enyo yelled 
Horribly. Loud their glancing armour clanged: 
They stabbed, they hewed down hosts of foes untold 
With irresistible hands. The reeling ranks 
Fell, as the swath falls in the harvest heat, 
When the swift-handed reapers, ranged adown 
The field's long furrows, ply the sickle fast; 
So fell before their hands ranks numberless: 
With corpses earth was heaped, with torrent blood 
Was streaming: Strife incarnate o'er the slain 
Gloated. They paused not from the awful toil, 
But aye pressed on, like lions chasing sheep. 
Then turned the Greeks to craven flight; all feet 
Unmaimed as yet fled from the murderous war. 
Aye followed on Anchises' warrior son, 
Smiting foes' backs with his avenging spear: 
On pressed Eurymachus, while glowed the heart 
Of Healer Apollo watching from on high. 

As when a man descries a herd of swine 
Draw nigh his ripening corn, before the sheaves 
Fall neath the reapers' hands, and harketh on 
Against them his strong dogs; as down they rush, 
The spoilers see and quake; no more think they 
Of feasting, but they turn in panic flight 
Huddling: fast follow at their heels the hounds 
Biting remorselessly, while long and loud 
Squealing they flee, and joys the harvest's lord; 
So rejoiced Phoebus, seeing from the war 
Fleeing the mighty Argive host. No more 
Cared they for deeds of men, but cried to the Gods 
For swift feet, in whose feet alone was hope 
To escape Eurymachus' and Aeneas' spears 
Which lightened ever all along their rear. 

But one Greek, over-trusting in his strength, 
Or by Fate's malice to destruction drawn, 
Curbed in mid flight from war's turmoil his steed, 
And strove to wheel him round into the fight 
To face the foe. But fierce Agenor thrust 
Ere he was ware; his two-edged partizan 
Shore though his shoulder; yea, the very bone 
Of that gashed arm was cloven by the steel; 
The tendons parted, the veins spirted blood: 
Down by his horse's neck he slid, and straight 
Fell mid the dead. But still the strong arm hung 
With rigid fingers locked about the reins 
Like a live man's. Weird marvel was that sight, 
The bloody hand down hanging from the rein, 
Scaring the foes yet more, by Ares' will. 
Thou hadst said, "It craveth still for horsemanship!" 
So bare the steed that sign of his slain lord. 

Aeneas hurled his spear; it found the waist 
Of Anthalus' son, it pierced the navel through, 
Dragging the inwards with it. Stretched in dust, 
Clutching with agonized hands at steel and bowels, 
Horribly shrieked he, tore with his teeth the earth 
Groaning, till life and pain forsook the man. 
Scared were the Argives, like a startled team 
Of oxen 'neath the yoke-band straining hard, 
What time the sharp-fanged gadfly stings their flanks 
Athirst for blood, and they in frenzy of pain 
Start from the furrow, and sore disquieted 
The hind is for marred work, and for their sake, 
Lest haply the recoiling ploughshare light 
On their leg-sinews, and hamstring his team; 
So were the Danaans scared, so feared for them 
Achilles' son, and shouted thunder-voiced: 
"Cravens, why flee, like starlings nothing-worth 
Scared by a hawk that swoopeth down on them? 
Come, play the men! Better it is by far 
To die in war than choose unmanly flight!" 

Then to his cry they hearkened, and straightway 
Were of good heart. Mighty of mood he leapt 
Upon the Trojans, swinging in his hand 
The lightening spear: swept after him his host 
Of Myrmidons with hearts swelled with the strength 
Resistless of a tempest; so the Greeks 
Won breathing-space. With fury like his sire's 
One after other slew he of the foe. 
Recoiling back they fell, as waves on-rolled 
By Boreas foaming from the deep to the strand, 
Are caught by another blast that whirlwind-like 
Leaps, in a short lull of the north-wind, forth, 
Smites them full-face, and hurls them back from the shore;

So them that erewhile on the Danaans pressed 
Godlike Achilles' son now backward hurled 
A short space only brave Aeneas' spirit 
Let him not flee, but made him bide the fight 
Fearlessly; and Enyo level held 
The battle's scales. Yet not against Aeneas 
Achilles' son upraised his father's spear, 
But elsewhither turned his fury: in reverence 
For Aphrodite, Thetis splendour-veiled 
Turned from that man her mighty son's son's rage 
And giant strength on other hosts of foes. 
There slew he many a Trojan, while the ranks 
Of Greeks were ravaged by Aeneas' hand. 
Over the battle-slain the vultures joyed, 
Hungry to rend the hearts and flesh of men. 
But all the Nymphs were wailing, daughters born 
Of Xanthus and fair-flowing Simois. 

So toiled they in the fight: the wind's breath rolled 
Huge dust-clouds up; the illimitable air 
Was one thick haze, as with a sudden mist: 
Earth disappeared, faces were blotted out; 
Yet still they fought on; each man, whomso he met, 
Ruthlessly slew him, though his very friend 
It might be -- in that turmoil none could tell 
Who met him, friend or foe: blind wilderment 
Enmeshed the hosts. And now had all been blent 
Confusedly, had perished miserably, 
All falling by their fellows' murderous swords, 
Had not Cronion from Olympus helped 
Their sore strait, and he swept aside the dust 
Of conflict, and he calmed those deadly winds. 
Yet still the hosts fought on; but lighter far 
Their battle-travail was, who now discerned 
Whom in the fray to smite, and whom to spare. 
The Danaans now forced back the Trojan host, 
The Trojans now the Danaan ranks, as swayed 
The dread fight to and fro. From either side 
Darts leapt and fell like snowflakes. Far away 
Shepherds from Ida trembling watched the strife, 
And to the Heaven-abiders lifted hands 
Of supplication, praying that all their foes 
Might perish, and that from the woeful war 
Troy might win breathing-space, and see at last 
The day of freedom: the Gods hearkened not. 
Far other issues Fate devised, nor recked 
Of Zeus the Almighty, nor of none beside 
Of the Immortals. Her unpitying soul 
Cares naught what doom she spinneth with her thread 
Inevitable, be it for men new-born 
Or cities: all things wax and wane through her. 
So by her hest the battle-travail swelled 
'Twixt Trojan chariot-lords and Greeks that closed 
In grapple of fight -- they dealt each other death 
Ruthlessly: no man quailed, but stout of heart 
Fought on; for courage thrusts men into war. 

But now when many had perished in the dust, 
Then did the Argive might prevail at last 
By stern decree of Pallas; for she came 
Into the heart of battle, hot to help 
The Greeks to lay waste Priam's glorious town. 
Then Aphrodite, who lamented sore 
For Paris slain, snatched suddenly away 
Renowned Aeneas from the deadly strife, 
And poured thick mist about him. Fate forbade 
That hero any longer to contend 
With Argive foes without the high-built wall. 
Yea, and his mother sorely feared the wrath 
Of Pallas passing-wise, whose heart was keen 
To help the Danaans now -- yea, feared lest she 
Might slay him even beyond his doom, who spared 
Not Ares' self, a mightier far than he. 

No more the Trojans now abode the edge 
Of fight, but all disheartened backward drew. 
For like fierce ravening beasts the Argive men 
Leapt on them, mad with murderous rage of war. 
Choked with their slain the river-channels were, 
Heaped was the field; in red dust thousands fell, 
Horses and men; and chariots overturned 
Were strewn there: blood was streaming all around 
Like rain, for deadly Doom raged through the fray. 

Men stabbed with swords, and men impaled on spears 
Lay all confusedly, like scattered beams, 
When on the strand of the low-thundering sea 
Men from great girders of a tall ship's hull 
Strike out the bolts and clamps, and scatter wide 
Long planks and timbers, till the whole broad beach 
Is paved with beams o'erplashed by darkling surge; 
So lay in dust and blood those slaughtered men, 
Rapture and pain of fight forgotten now. 

A remnant from the pitiless strife escaped 
Entered their stronghold, scarce eluding doom. 
Children and wives from their limbs blood-besprent 
Received their arms bedabbled with foul gore; 
And baths for all were heated. Leeches ran 
Through all the town in hot haste to the homes 
Of wounded men to minister to their hurts. 
Here wives and daughters moaned round men come back 
From war, there cried on many who came not 
Here, men stung to the soul by bitter pangs 
Groaned upon beds of pain; there, toil-spent men 
Turned them to supper. Whinnied the swift steeds 
And neighed o'er mangers heaped. By tent and ship 
Far off the Greeks did even as they of Troy. 

When o'er the streams of Ocean Dawn drove up 
Her splendour-flashing steeds, and earth's tribes waked,

Then the strong Argives' battle-eager sons 
Marched against Priam's city lofty-towered, 
Save some that mid the tents by wounded men 
Tarried, lest haply raiders on the ships 
Might fall, to help the Trojans, while these fought 
The foe from towers, while rose the flame of war. 

Before the Scaean gate fought Capaneus' son 
And godlike Diomedes. High above 
Deiphobus battle-staunch and strong Polites 
With many comrades, stoutly held them back 
With arrows and huge stones. Clanged evermore 
The smitten helms and shields that fenced strong men 
From bitter doom and unrelenting fate, 

Before the Gate Idaean Achilles' son 
Set in array the fight: around him toiled 
His host of battle-cunning Myrmidons. 
Helenus and Agenor gallant-souled, 
Down-hailing darts, against them held the wall, 
Aye cheering on their men. No spurring these 
Needed to fight hard for their country's walls. 

Odysseus and Eurypylus made assault 
Unresting on the gates that fated the plain 
And looked to the swift ships. From wall and tower 
With huge stones brave Aeneas made defence. 

In battle-stress by Simons Teucer toiled. 
Each endured hardness at his several post. 

Then round war-wise Odysseus men renowned, 
By that great captain's battle cunning ruled, 
Locked shields together, raised them o'er their heads 
Ranged side by side, that many were made one. 
Thou hadst said it was a great hall's solid roof, 
Which no tempestuous wind-blast misty wet 
Can pierce, nor rain from heaven in torrents poured. 
So fenced about with shields firm stood the ranks 
Of Argives, one in heart for fight, and one 
In that array close-welded. From above 
The Trojans hailed great stones; as from a rock 
Rolled these to earth. Full many a spear and dart 
And galling javelin in the pierced shields stood; 
Some in the earth stood; many glanced away 
With bent points falling baffled from the shields 
Battered on all sides. But that clangorous din 
None feared; none flinched; as pattering drops of rain 
They heard it. Up to the rampart's foot they marched: 
None hung back; shoulder to shoulder on they came 
Like a long lurid cloud that o'er the sky 
Cronion trails in wild midwinter-tide. 
On that battalion moved, with thunderous tread 
Of tramping feet: a little above the earth 
Rose up the dust; the breeze swept it aside 
Drifting away behind the men. There went 
A sound confused of voices with them, like 
The hum of bees that murmur round the hives, 
And multitudinous panting, and the gasp 
Of men hard-breathing. Exceeding glad the sons 
Of Atreus, glorying in them, saw that wall 
Unwavering of doom-denouncing war. 
In one dense mass against the city-gate 
They hurled themselves, with twibills strove to breach 
The long walls, from their hinges to upheave 
The gates, and dash to earth. The pulse of hope 
Beat strong in those proud hearts. But naught availed 
Targes nor levers, when Aeneas' might 
Swung in his hands a stone like a thunderbolt, 
Hurled it with uttermost strength, and dashed to death 
All whom it caught beneath the shields, as when 
A mountain's precipice-edge breaks off and falls 
On pasturing goats, and all that graze thereby 
Tremble; so were those Danaans dazed with dread. 
Stone after stone he hurled on the reeling ranks, 
As when amid the hills Olympian Zeus 
With thunderbolts and blazing lightnings rends 
From their foundations crags that rim a peak, 
And this way, that way, sends them hurtling down; 
Then the flocks tremble, scattering in wild flight; 
So quailed the Achaeans, when Aeneas dashed 
To sudden fragments all that battle-wall 
Moulded of adamant shields, because a God 
Gave more than human strength. No man of them 
Could lift his eyes unto him in that fight, 
Because the arms that lapped his sinewy limbs 
Flashed like the heaven-born lightnings. At his side 
Stood, all his form divine in darkness cloaked, 
Ares the terrible, and winged the flight 
Of what bare down to the Argives doom or dread. 
He fought as when Olympian Zeus himself 
From heaven in wrath smote down the insolent bands 
Of giants grim, and shook the boundless earth, 
And sea, and ocean, and the heavens, when reeled 
The knees of Atlas neath the rush of Zeus. 
So crumbled down beneath Aeneas' bolts 
The Argive squadrons. All along the wall 
Wroth with the foeman rushed he: from his hands 
Whatso he lighted on in onslaught-haste 
Hurled he; for many a battle-staying bolt 
Lay on the walls of those staunch Dardan men. 
With such Aeneas stormed in giant might, 
With such drave back the thronging foes. All round 
The Trojans played the men. Sore travail and pain 
Had all folk round the city: many fell, 
Argives and Trojans. Rang the battle-cries: 
Aeneas cheered the war-fain Trojans on 
To fight for home, for wives, and their own souls 
With a good heart: war-staunch Achilles' son 
Shouted: "Flinch not, ye Argives, from the walls, 
Till Troy be taken, and sink down in flames!" 
And round these twain an awful measureless roar 
Rang, daylong as they fought: no breathing-space 
Came from the war to them whose spirits burned, 
These, to smite Ilium, those, to guard her safe. 

But from Aeneas valiant-souled afar 
Fought Aias, speeding midst the men of Troy 
Winged death; for now his arrow straight through air 
Flew, now his deadly dart, and smote them down 
One after one: yet others cowered away 
Before his peerless prowess, and abode 
The fight no more, but fenceless left the wall 

Then one, of all the Locrians mightiest, 
Fierce-souled Alcimedon, trusting in his prince 
And his own might and valour of his youth, 
All battle-eager on a ladder set 
Swift feet, to pave for friends a death-strewn path 
Into the town. Above his head he raised 

The screening shield; up that dread path he went 
Hardening his heart from trembling, in his hand 
Now shook the threatening spear, now upward climbed  
Fast high in air he trod the perilous way. 
Now on the Trojans had disaster come, 
But, even as above the parapet 
His head rose, and for the first time and the last 
From her high rampart he looked down on Troy, 
Aeneas, who had marked, albeit afar, 
That bold assault, rushed on him, dashed on his head 
So huge a stone that the hero's mighty strength 
Shattered the ladder. Down from on high he rushed 
As arrow from the string: death followed him 
As whirling round he fell; with air was blent 
His lost life, ere he crashed to the stony ground. 
Strong spear, broad shield, in mid fall flew from his hands,

And from his head the helm: his corslet came 
Alone with him to earth. The Locrian men 
Groaned, seeing their champion quelled by evil doom; 
For all his hair and all the stones around 
Were brain-bespattered: all his bones were crushed, 
And his once active limbs besprent with gore. 

Then godlike Poeas' war-triumphant son 
Marked where Aeneas stormed along the wall 
In lion-like strength, and straightway shot a shaft 
Aimed at that glorious hero, neither missed 
The man: yet not through his unyielding targe 
To the fair flesh it won, being turned aside 
By Cytherea and the shield, but grazed 
The buckler lightly: yet not all in vain 
Fell earthward, but between the targe and helm 
Smote Medon: from the tower he fell, as falls 
A wild goat from a crag, the hunter's shaft 
Deep in its heart: so nerveless-flung he fell, 
And fled away from him the precious life. 
Wroth for his friend, a stone Aeneas hurled, 
And Philoctetes' stalwart comrade slew, 
Toxaechmes; for he shattered his head and crushed 
Helmet and skull-bones; and his noble heart 
Was stilled. Loud shouted princely Poeas' son: 
"Aeneas, thou, forsooth, dost deem thyself 
A mighty champion, fighting from a tower 
Whence craven women war with foes! Now if 
Thou be a man, come forth without the wall 
In battle-harness, and so learn to know 
In spear-craft and in bow-craft Poeas' son!" 

So cried he; but Anchises' valiant seed, 
How fain soe'er, naught answered, for the stress 
Of desperate conflict round that wall and burg 
Ceaselessly raging: pause from fight was none: 
Yea, for long time no respite had there been 
For the war-weary from that endless toil. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XII

How the Wooden Horse Was Fashioned, and Brought into Troy By Her
People 

When round the walls of Troy the Danaan host 
Had borne much travail, and yet the end was not, 
By Calchas then assembled were the chiefs; 
For his heart was instructed by the hests 
Of Phoebus, by the flights of birds, the stars, 
And all the signs that speak to men the will 
Of Heaven; so he to that assembly cried: 
"No longer toil in leaguer of yon walls; 
Some other counsel let your hearts devise, 
Some stratagem to help the host and us. 
For here but yesterday I saw a sign: 
A falcon chased a dove, and she, hard pressed, 
Entered a cleft of the rock; and chafing he 
Tarried long time hard by that rift, but she 
Abode in covert. Nursing still his wrath, 
He hid him in a bush. Forth darted she, 
In folly deeming him afar: he swooped, 
And to the hapless dove dealt wretched death. 
Therefore by force essay we not to smite Troy, 
but let cunning stratagem avail." 

He spake; but no man's wit might find a way 
To escape their grievous travail, as they sought 
To find a remedy, till Laertes' son 
Discerned it of his wisdom, and he spake: 
"Friend, in high honour held of the Heavenly Ones, 
If doomed it be indeed that Priam's burg 
By guile must fall before the war-worn Greeks, 
A great Horse let us fashion, in the which 
Our mightiest shall take ambush. Let the host 
Burn all their tents, and sail from hence away 
To Tenedos; so the Trojans, from their towers 
Gazing, shall stream forth fearless to the plain. 
Let some brave man, unknown of any in Troy, 
With a stout heart abide without the Horse, 
Crouching beneath its shadow, who shall say: 
"`Achaea's lords of might, exceeding fain 
Safe to win home, made this their offering 
For safe return, an image to appease 
The wrath of Pallas for her image stolen 
From Troy.' And to this story shall he stand, 
How long soe'er they question him, until, 
Though never so relentless, they believe, 
And drag it, their own doom, within the town. 
Then shall war's signal unto us be given -- 
To them at sea, by sudden flash of torch, 
To the ambush, by the cry, `Come forth the Horse!' 
When unsuspecting sleep the sons of Troy." 

He spake, and all men praised him: most of all 
Extolled him Calchas, that such marvellous guile 
He put into the Achaeans' hearts, to be 
For them assurance of triumph, but for Troy 
Ruin; and to those battle-lords he cried: 
"Let your hearts seek none other stratagem, 
Friends; to war-strong Odysseus' rede give ear. 
His wise thought shall not miss accomplishment. 
Yea, our desire even now the Gods fulfil. 
Hark! for new tokens come from the Unseen! 
Lo, there on high crash through the firmament 
Zeus' thunder and lightning! See, where birds to right 
Dart past, and scream with long-resounding cry! 
Go to, no more in endless leaguer of Troy 
Linger we. Hard necessity fills the foe 
With desperate courage that makes cowards brave; 
For then are men most dangerous, when they stake 
Their lives in utter recklessness of death, 
As battle now the aweless sons of Troy 
All round their burg, mad with the lust of fight." 

But cried Achilles' battle-eager son: 
"Calchas, brave men meet face to face their foes! 
Who skulk behind their walls, and fight from towers, 
Are nidderings, hearts palsied with base fear. 
Hence with all thought of wile and stratagem! 
The great war-travail of the spear beseems 
True heroes. Best in battle are the brave." 

But answer made to him Laertes' seed: 
"Bold-hearted child of aweless Aeacus' son, 
This as beseems a hero princely and brave, 
Dauntlessly trusting in thy strength, thou say'st. 
Yet thine invincible sire's unquailing might 
Availed not to smite Priam's wealthy burg, 
Nor we, for all our travail. Nay, with speed, 
As counselleth Calchas, go we to the ships, 
And fashion we the Horse by Epeius' hands, 
Who in the woodwright's craft is chiefest far 
Of Argives, for Athena taught his lore." 

Then all their mightiest men gave ear to him 
Save twain, fierce-hearted Neoptolemus 
And Philoctetes mighty-souled; for these 
Still were insatiate for the bitter fray, 
Still longed for turmoil of the fight. They bade 
Their own folk bear against that giant wall 
What things soe'er for war's assaults avail, 
In hope to lay that stately fortress low, 
Seeing Heaven's decrees had brought them both to war. 
Yea, they had haply accomplished all their will, 
But from the sky Zeus showed his wrath; he shook 
The earth beneath their feet, and all the air 
Shuddered, as down before those heroes twain 
He hurled his thunderbolt: wide echoes crashed 
Through all Dardania. Unto fear straightway 
Turned were their bold hearts: they forgat their might, 
And Calchas' counsels grudgingly obeyed. 
So with the Argives came they to the ships 
In reverence for the seer who spake from Zeus 
Or Phoebus, and they obeyed him utterly. 

What time round splendour-kindled heavens the stars 
From east to west far-flashing wheel, and when 
Man doth forget his toil, in that still hour 
Athena left the high mansions of the Blest, 
Clothed her in shape of a maiden tender-fleshed, 
And came to ships and host. Over the head 
Of brave Epeius stood she in his dream, 
And bade him build a Horse of tree: herself 
Would labour in his labour, and herself 
Stand by his side, to the work enkindling him. 
Hearing the Goddess' word, with a glad laugh 
Leapt he from careless sleep: right well he knew 
The Immortal One celestial. Now his heart 
Could hold no thought beside; his mind was fixed 
Upon the wondrous work, and through his soul 
Marched marshalled each device of craftsmanship. 

When rose the dawn, and thrust back kindly night 
To Erebus, and through the firmament streamed 
Glad glory, then Epeius told his dream 
To eager Argives -- all he saw and heard; 
And hearkening joyed they with exceeding joy. 
Straightway to tall-tressed Ida's leafy glades 
The sons of Atreus sent swift messengers. 
These laid the axe unto the forest-pines, 
And hewed the great trees: to their smiting rang 
The echoing glens. On those far-stretching hills 
All bare of undergrowth the high peaks rose: 
Open their glades were, not, as in time past, 
Haunted of beasts: there dry the tree-trunks rose 
Wooing the winds. Even these the Achaeans hewed 
With axes, and in haste they bare them down 
From those shagged mountain heights to Hellespont's shores.

Strained with a strenuous spirit at the work 
Young men and mules; and all the people toiled 
Each at his task obeying Epeius's hest. 
For with the keen steel some were hewing beams, 
Some measuring planks, and some with axes lopped 
Branches away from trunks as yet unsawn: 
Each wrought his several work. Epeius first 
Fashioned the feet of that great Horse of Wood: 
The belly next he shaped, and over this 
Moulded the back and the great loins behind, 
The throat in front, and ridged the towering neck 
With waving mane: the crested head he wrought, 
The streaming tail, the ears, the lucent eyes -- 
All that of lifelike horses have. So grew 
Like a live thing that more than human work, 
For a God gave to a man that wondrous craft. 
And in three days, by Pallas's decree, 
Finished was all. Rejoiced thereat the host 
Of Argos, marvelling how the wood expressed 
Mettle, and speed of foot -- yea, seemed to neigh. 
Godlike Epeius then uplifted hands 
To Pallas, and for that huge Horse he prayed: 
"Hear, great-souled Goddess: bless thine Horse and me!" 
He spake: Athena rich in counsel heard, 
And made his work a marvel to all men 
Which saw, or heard its fame in days to be. 

But while the Danaans o'er Epeius' work 
Joyed, and their routed foes within the walls 
Tarried, and shrank from death and pitiless doom, 
Then, when imperious Zeus far from the Gods 
Had gone to Ocean's streams and Tethys' caves, 
Strife rose between the Immortals: heart with heart 
Was set at variance. Riding on the blasts 
Of winds, from heaven to earth they swooped: the air 
Crashed round them. Lighting down by Xanthus' stream 
Arrayed they stood against each other, these 
For the Achaeans, for the Trojans those; 
And all their souls were thrilled with lust of war: 
There gathered too the Lords of the wide Sea. 
These in their wrath were eager to destroy 
The Horse of Guile and all the ships, and those 
Fair Ilium. But all-contriving Fate 
Held them therefrom, and turned their hearts to strife 
Against each other. Ares to the fray 
Rose first, and on Athena rushed. Thereat 
Fell each on other: clashed around their limbs 
The golden arms celestial as they charged. 
Round them the wide sea thundered, the dark earth 
Quaked 'neath immortal feet. Rang from them all 
Far-pealing battle-shouts; that awful cry 
Rolled up to the broad-arching heaven, and down 
Even to Hades' fathomless abyss: 
Trembled the Titans there in depths of gloom. 
Ida's long ridges sighed, sobbed clamorous streams 
Of ever-flowing rivers, groaned ravines 
Far-furrowed, Argive ships, and Priam's towers. 
Yet men feared not, for naught they knew of all 
That strife, by Heaven's decree. Then her high peaks 
The Gods' hands wrenched from Ida's crest, and hurled 
Against each other: but like crumbling sands 
Shivered they fell round those invincible limbs, 
Shattered to small dust. But the mind of Zeus, 
At the utmost verge of earth, was ware of all: 
Straight left he Ocean's stream, and to wide heaven 
Ascended, charioted upon the winds, 
The East, the North, the West-wind, and the South: 
For Iris rainbow-plumed led 'neath the yoke 
Of his eternal ear that stormy team, 
The ear which Time the immortal framed for him 
Of adamant with never-wearying hands. 
So came he to Olympus' giant ridge. 
His wrath shook all the firmament, as crashed 
From east to west his thunders; lightnings gleamed, 
As thick and fast his thunderbolts poured to earth, 
And flamed the limitless welkin. Terror fell 
Upon the hearts of those Immortals: quaked 
The limbs of all -- ay, deathless though they were! 
Then Themis, trembling for them, swift as thought 
Leapt down through clouds, and came with speed to them --

For in the strife she only had no part 
And stood between the fighters, and she cried: 
"Forbear the conflict! O, when Zeus is wroth, 
It ill beseems that everlasting Gods 
Should fight for men's sake, creatures of a day: 
Else shall ye be all suddenly destroyed; 
For Zeus will tear up all the hills, and hurl 
Upon you: sons nor daughters will he spare, 
But bury 'neath one ruin of shattered earth 
All. No escape shall ye find thence to light, 
In horror of darkness prisoned evermore." 

Dreading Zeus' menace gave they heed to her, 
From strife refrained, and cast away their wrath, 
And were made one in peace and amity. 
Some heavenward soared, some plunged into the sea, 
On earth stayed some. Amid the Achaean host 
Spake in his subtlety Laertes' son: 
"O valorous-hearted lords of the Argive host, 
Now prove in time of need what men ye be, 
How passing-strong, how flawless-brave! The hour 
Is this for desperate emprise: now, with hearts 
Heroic, enter ye yon carven horse, 
So to attain the goal of this stern war. 
For better it is by stratagem and craft 
Now to destroy this city, for whose sake 
Hither we came, and still are suffering 
Many afflictions far from our own land. 
Come then, and let your hearts be stout and strong 
For he who in stress of fight hath turned to bay 
And snatched a desperate courage from despair, 
Oft, though the weaker, slays a mightier foe. 
For courage, which is all men's glory, makes 
The heart great. Come then, set the ambush, ye 
Which be our mightiest, and the rest shall go 
To Tenedos' hallowed burg, and there abide 
Until our foes have haled within their walls 
Us with the Horse, as deeming that they bring 
A gift unto Tritonis. Some brave man, 
One whom the Trojans know not, yet we lack, 
To harden his heart as steel, and to abide 
Near by the Horse. Let that man bear in mind 
Heedfully whatsoe'er I said erewhile. 
And let none other thought be in his heart, 
Lest to the foe our counsel be revealed." 

Then, when all others feared, a man far-famed 
Made answer, Sinon, marked of destiny 
To bring the great work to accomplishment. 
Therefore with worship all men looked on him, 
The loyal of heart, as in the midst he spake: 
"Odysseus, and all ye Achaean chiefs, 
This work for which ye crave will I perform -- 
Yea, though they torture me, though into fire 
Living they thrust me; for mine heart is fixed 
Not to escape, but die by hands of foes, 
Except I crown with glory your desire." 

Stoutly he spake: right glad the Argives were; 
And one said: "How the Gods have given to-day 
High courage to this man! He hath not been 
Heretofore valiant. Heaven is kindling him 
To be the Trojans' ruin, but to us 
Salvation. Now full soon, I trow, we reach 
The goal of grievous war, so long unseen." 

So a voice murmured mid the Achaean host. 
Then, to stir up the heroes, Nestor cried: 
"Now is the time, dear sons, for courage and strength: 
Now do the Gods bring nigh the end of toil: 
Now give they victory to our longing hands. 
Come, bravely enter ye this cavernous Horse. 
For high renown attendeth courage high. 
Oh that my limbs were mighty as of old, 
When Aeson's son for heroes called, to man 
Swift Argo, when of the heroes foremost I 
Would gladly have entered her, but Pelias 
The king withheld me in my own despite. 
Ah me, but now the burden of years -- O nay, 
As I were young, into the Horse will I 
Fearlessly! Glory and strength shall courage give." 

Answered him golden-haired Achilles' son: 
"Nestor, in wisdom art thou chief of men; 
But cruel age hath caught thee in his grip: 
No more thy strength may match thy gallant will; 
Therefore thou needs must unto Tenedos' strand. 
We will take ambush, we the youths, of strife 
Insatiate still, as thou, old sire, dost bid." 

Then strode the son of Neleus to his side, 
And kissed his hands, and kissed the head of him 
Who offered thus himself the first of all 
To enter that huge horse, being peril-fain, 
And bade the elder of days abide without. 
Then to the battle-eager spake the old: 
"Thy father's son art thou! Achilles' might 
And chivalrous speech be here! O, sure am I 
That by thine hands the Argives shall destroy 
The stately city of Priam. At the last, 
After long travail, glory shall be ours, 
Ours, after toil and tribulation of war; 
The Gods have laid tribulation at men's feet 
But happiness far off, and toil between: 
Therefore for men full easy is the path 
To ruin, and the path to fame is hard, 
Where feet must press right on through painful toil." 

He spake: replied Achilles' glorious son: 
"Old sire, as thine heart trusteth, be it vouchsafed 
In answer to our prayers; for best were this: 
But if the Gods will otherwise, be it so. 
Ay, gladlier would I fall with glory in fight 
Than flee from Troy, bowed 'neath a load of shame." 

Then in his sire's celestial arms he arrayed 
His shoulders; and with speed in harness sheathed 
Stood the most mighty heroes, in whose healers 
Was dauntless spirit. Tell, ye Queens of Song, 
Now man by man the names of all that passed 
Into the cavernous Horse; for ye inspired 
My soul with all my song, long ere my cheek 
Grew dark with manhood's beard, what time I fed 
My goodly sheep on Smyrna's pasture-lea, 
From Hermus thrice so far as one may hear 
A man's shout, by the fane of Artemis, 
In the Deliverer's Grove, upon a hill 
Neither exceeding low nor passing high. 

Into that cavernous Horse Achilles' son 
First entered, strong Menelaus followed then, 
Odysseus, Sthenelus, godlike Diomede, 
Philoctetes and Menestheus, Anticlus, 
Thoas and Polypoetes golden-haired, 
Aias, Eurypylus, godlike Thrasymede, 
Idomeneus, Meriones, far-famous twain, 
Podaleirius of spears, Eurymachus, 
Teucer the godlike, fierce Ialmenus, 
Thalpius, Antimachus, Leonteus staunch, 
Eumelus, and Euryalus fair as a God, 
Amphimachus, Demophoon, Agapenor, 
Akamas, Meges stalwart Phyleus' son -- 
Yea, more, even all their chiefest, entered in, 
So many as that carven Horse could hold. 
Godlike Epeius last of all passed in, 
The fashioner of the Horse; in his breast lay 
The secret of the opening of its doors 
And of their closing: therefore last of all 
He entered, and he drew the ladders up 
Whereby they clomb: then made he all secure, 
And set himself beside the bolt. So all 
In silence sat 'twixt victory and death. 

But the rest fired the tents, wherein erewhile 
They slept, and sailed the wide sea in their ships. 
Two mighty-hearted captains ordered these, 
Nestor and Agamemnon lord of spears. 
Fain had they also entered that great Horse, 
But all the host withheld them, bidding stay 
With them a-shipboard, ordering their array: 
For men far better work the works of war 
When their kings oversee them; therefore these 
Abode without, albeit mighty men. 
So came they swiftly unto Tenedos' shore, 
And dropped the anchor-stones, then leapt in haste 
Forth of the ships, and silent waited there 
Keen-watching till the signal-torch should flash. 

But nigh the foe were they in the Horse, and now 
Looked they for death, and now to smite the town; 
And on their hopes and fears uprose the dawn. 

Then marked the Trojans upon Hellespont's strand 
The smoke upleaping yet through air: no more 
Saw they the ships which brought to them from Greece 
Destruction dire. With joy to the shore they ran, 
But armed them first, for fear still haunted them 
Then marked they that fair-carven Horse, and stood 
Marvelling round, for a mighty work was there. 
A hapless-seeming man thereby they spied, 
Sinon; and this one, that one questioned him 
Touching the Danaans, as in a great ring 
They compassed him, and with unangry words 
First questioned, then with terrible threatenings. 
Then tortured they that man of guileful soul 
Long time unceasing. Firm as a rock abode 
The unquivering limbs, the unconquerable will. 
His ears, his nose, at last they shore away 
In every wise tormenting him, until 
He should declare the truth, whither were gone 
The Danaans in their ships, what thing the Horse 
Concealed within it. He had armed his mind 
With resolution, and of outrage foul 
Recked not; his soul endured their cruel stripes, 
Yea, and the bitter torment of the fire; 
For strong endurance into him Hera breathed; 
And still he told them the same guileful tale: 
"The Argives in their ships flee oversea 
Weary of tribulation of endless war. 
This horse by Calchas' counsel fashioned they 
For wise Athena, to propitiate 
Her stern wrath for that guardian image stol'n 
From Troy. And by Odysseus' prompting I 
Was marked for slaughter, to be sacrificed 
To the sea-powers, beside the moaning waves, 
To win them safe return. But their intent 
I marked; and ere they spilt the drops of wine, 
And sprinkled hallowed meal upon mine head, 
Swiftly I fled, and, by the help of Heaven, 
I flung me down, clasping the Horse's feet; 
And they, sore loth, perforce must leave me there 
Dreading great Zeus's daughter mighty-souled." 

In subtlety so he spake, his soul untamed 
By pain; for a brave man's part is to endure 
To the uttermost. And of the Trojans some 
Believed him, others for a wily knave 
Held him, of whose mind was Laocoon. 
Wisely he spake: "A deadly fraud is this," 
He said, "devised by the Achaean chiefs!" 
And cried to all straightway to burn the Horse, 
And know if aught within its timbers lurked. 

Yea, and they had obeyed him, and had 'scaped 
Destruction; but Athena, fiercely wroth 
With him, the Trojans, and their city, shook 
Earth's deep foundations 'neath Laocoon's feet. 
Straight terror fell on him, and trembling bowed 
The knees of the presumptuous: round his head 
Horror of darkness poured; a sharp pang thrilled 
His eyelids; swam his eyes beneath his brows; 
His eyeballs, stabbed with bitter anguish, throbbed 
Even from the roots, and rolled in frenzy of pain. 
Clear through his brain the bitter torment pierced 
Even to the filmy inner veil thereof; 
Now bloodshot were his eyes, now ghastly green; 
Anon with rheum they ran, as pours a stream 
Down from a rugged crag, with thawing snow 
Made turbid. As a man distraught he seemed: 
All things he saw showed double, and he groaned 
Fearfully; yet he ceased not to exhort 
The men of Troy, and recked not of his pain. 
Then did the Goddess strike him utterly blind. 
Stared his fixed eyeballs white from pits of blood; 
And all folk groaned for pity of their friend, 
And dread of the Prey-giver, lest he had sinned 
In folly against her, and his mind was thus 
Warped to destruction yea, lest on themselves 
Like judgment should be visited, to avenge 
The outrage done to hapless Sinon's flesh, 
Whereby they hoped to wring the truth from him. 
So led they him in friendly wise to Troy, 
Pitying him at the last. Then gathered all, 
And o'er that huge Horse hastily cast a rope, 
And made it fast above; for under its feet 
Smooth wooden rollers had Epeius laid, 
That, dragged by Trojan hands, it might glide on 
Into their fortress. One and all they haled 
With multitudinous tug and strain, as when 
Down to the sea young men sore-labouring drag 
A ship; hard-crushed the stubborn rollers groan, 
As, sliding with weird shrieks, the keel descends 
Into the sea-surge; so that host with toil 
Dragged up unto their city their own doom, 
Epeius' work. With great festoons of flowers 
They hung it, and their own heads did they wreathe, 
While answering each other pealed the flutes. 
Grimly Enyo laughed, seeing the end 
Of that dire war; Hera rejoiced on high; 
Glad was Athena. When the Trojans came 
Unto their city, brake they down the walls, 
Their city's coronal, that the Horse of Death 
Might be led in. Troy's daughters greeted it 
With shouts of salutation; marvelling all 
Gazed at the mighty work where lurked their doom. 

But still Laocoon ceased not to exhort 
His countrymen to burn the Horse with fire: 
They would not hear, for dread of the Gods' wrath. 
But then a yet more hideous punishment 
Athena visited on his hapless sons. 
A cave there was, beneath a rugged cliff 
Exceeding high, unscalable, wherein 
Dwelt fearful monsters of the deadly brood 
Of Typhon, in the rock-clefts of the isle 
Calydna that looks Troyward from the sea. 
Thence stirred she up the strength of serpents twain, 
And summoned them to Troy. By her uproused 
They shook the island as with earthquake: roared 
The sea; the waves disparted as they came. 
Onward they swept with fearful-flickering tongues: 
Shuddered the very monsters of the deep: 
Xanthus' and Simois' daughters moaned aloud, 
The River-nymphs: the Cyprian Queen looked down 
In anguish from Olympus. Swiftly they came 
Whither the Goddess sped them: with grim jaws 
Whetting their deadly fangs, on his hapless sons 
Sprang they. All Trojans panic-stricken fled, 
Seeing those fearsome dragons in their town. 
No man, though ne'er so dauntless theretofore, 
Dared tarry; ghastly dread laid hold on all 
Shrinking in horror from the monsters. Screamed 
The women; yea, the mother forgat her child, 
Fear-frenzied as she fled: all Troy became 
One shriek of fleers, one huddle of jostling limbs: 
The streets were choked with cowering fugitives. 
Alone was left Laocoon with his sons, 
For death's doom and the Goddess chained their feet. 
Then, even as from destruction shrank the lads, 
Those deadly fangs had seized and ravined up 
The twain, outstretching to their sightless sire 
Agonized hands: no power to help had he. 
Trojans far off looked on from every side 
Weeping, all dazed. And, having now fulfilled 
Upon the Trojans Pallas' awful hest, 
Those monsters vanished 'neath the earth; and still 
Stands their memorial, where into the fane 
They entered of Apollo in Pergamus 
The hallowed. Therebefore the sons of Troy 
Gathered, and reared a cenotaph for those 
Who miserably had perished. Over it 
Their father from his blind eyes rained the tears: 
Over the empty tomb their mother shrieked, 
Boding the while yet worse things, wailing o'er 
The ruin wrought by folly of her lord, 
Dreading the anger of the Blessed Ones. 
As when around her void nest in a brake 
In sorest anguish moans the nightingale 
Whose fledglings, ere they learned her plaintive song, 
A hideous serpent's fangs have done to death, 
And left the mother anguish, endless woe, 
And bootless crying round her desolate home; 
So groaned she for her children's wretched death, 
So moaned she o'er the void tomb; and her pangs 
Were sharpened by her lord's plight stricken blind. 

While she for children and for husband moaned -- 
These slain, he of the sun's light portionless -- 
The Trojans to the Immortals sacrificed, 
Pouring the wine. Their hearts beat high with hope 
To escape the weary stress of woeful war. 
Howbeit the victims burned not, and the flames 
Died out, as though 'neath heavy-hissing rain; 
And writhed the smoke-wreaths blood-red, and the thighs 
Quivering from crumbling altars fell to earth. 
Drink-offerings turned to blood, Gods' statues wept, 
And temple-walls dripped gore: along them rolled 
Echoes of groaning out of depths unseen; 
And all the long walls shuddered: from the towers 
Came quick sharp sounds like cries of men in pain; 
And, weirdly shrieking, of themselves slid back 
The gate-bolts. Screaming "Desolation!" wailed 
The birds of night. Above that God-built burg 
A mist palled every star; and yet no cloud 
Was in the flashing heavens. By Phoebus' fane 
Withered the bays that erst were lush and green. 
Wolves and foul-feeding jackals came and howled 
Within the gates. Ay, other signs untold 
Appeared, portending woe to Dardanus' sons 
And Troy: yet no fear touched the Trojans' hearts 
Who saw all through the town those portents dire: 
Fate crazed them all, that midst their revelling 
Slain by their foes they might fill up their doom. 

One heart was steadfast, and one soul clear-eyed, 
Cassandra. Never her words were unfulfilled; 
Yet was their utter truth, by Fate's decree, 
Ever as idle wind in the hearers' ears, 
That no bar to Troy's ruin might be set. 
She saw those evil portents all through Troy 
Conspiring to one end; loud rang her cry, 
As roars a lioness that mid the brakes 
A hunter has stabbed or shot, whereat her heart 
Maddens, and down the long hills rolls her roar, 
And her might waxes tenfold; so with heart 
Aflame with prophecy came she forth her bower. 
Over her snowy shoulders tossed her hair 
Streaming far down, and wildly blazed her eyes. 
Her neck writhed, like a sapling in the wind 
Shaken, as moaned and shrieked that noble maid: 
"O wretches! into the Land of Darkness now 
We are passing; for all round us full of fire 
And blood and dismal moan the city is. 
Everywhere portents of calamity 
Gods show: destruction yawns before your feet. 
Fools! ye know not your doom: still ye rejoice 
With one consent in madness, who to Troy 
Have brought the Argive Horse where ruin lurks! 
Oh, ye believe not me, though ne'er so loud 
I cry! The Erinyes and the ruthless Fates, 
For Helen's spousals madly wroth, through Troy 
Dart on wild wings. And ye, ye are banqueting there 
In your last feast, on meats befouled with gore, 
When now your feet are on the Path of Ghosts!" 

Then cried a scoffing voice an ominous word: 
"Why doth a raving tongue of evil speech, 
Daughter of Priam, make thy lips to cry 
Words empty as wind? No maiden modesty 
With purity veils thee: thou art compassed round 
With ruinous madness; therefore all men scorn 
Thee, babbler! Hence, thine evil bodings speak 
To the Argives and thyself! For thee doth wait 
Anguish and shame yet bitterer than befell 
Presumptuous Laocoon. Shame it were 
In folly to destroy the Immortals' gift." 

So scoffed a Trojan: others in like sort 
Cried shame on her, and said she spake but lies, 
Saying that ruin and Fate's heavy stroke 
Were hard at hand. They knew not their own doom, 
And mocked, and thrust her back from that huge Horse  
For fain she was to smite its beams apart, 
Or burn with ravening fire. She snatched a brand 
Of blazing pine-wood from the hearth and ran 
In fury: in the other hand she bare 
A two-edged halberd: on that Horse of Doom 
She rushed, to cause the Trojans to behold 
With their own eyes the ambush hidden there. 
But straightway from her hands they plucked and flung 
Afar the fire and steel, and careless turned 
To the feast; for darkened o'er them their last night. 
Within the horse the Argives joyed to hear 
The uproar of Troy's feasters setting at naught 
Cassandra, but they marvelled that she knew 
So well the Achaeans' purpose and device. 

As mid the hills a furious pantheress, 
Which from the steading hounds and shepherd-folk 
Drive with fierce rush, with savage heart turns back 
Even in departing, galled albeit by darts: 
So from the great Horse fled she, anguish-racked 
For Troy, for all the ruin she foreknew. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIII

How Troy in the Night Was Taken and Sacked With Fire and Slaughter

So feasted they through Troy, and in their midst 
Loud pealed the flutes and pipes: on every hand 
Were song and dance, laughter and cries confused 
Of banqueters beside the meats and wine. 
They, lifting in their hands the beakers brimmed, 
Recklessly drank, till heavy of brain they grew, 
Till rolled their fluctuant eyes. Now and again 
Some mouth would babble the drunkard's broken words. 
The household gear, the very roof and walls 
Seemed as they rocked: all things they looked on seemed 
Whirled in wild dance. About their eyes a veil 
Of mist dropped, for the drunkard's sight is dimmed, 
And the wit dulled, when rise the fumes to the brain: 
And thus a heavy-headed feaster cried: 
"For naught the Danaans mustered that great host 
Hither! Fools, they have wrought not their intent, 
But with hopes unaccomplished from our town 
Like silly boys or women have they fled." 

So cried a Trojan wit-befogged with wine, 
Fool, nor discerned destruction at the doors. 

When sleep had locked his fetters everywhere 
Through Troy on folk fulfilled of wine and meat, 
Then Sinon lifted high a blazing torch 
To show the Argive men the splendour of fire. 
But fearfully the while his heart beat, lest 
The men of Troy might see it, and the plot 
Be suddenly revealed. But on their beds 
Sleeping their last sleep lay they, heavy with wine. 
The host saw, and from Tenedos set sail. 

Then nigh the Horse drew Sinon: softly he called, 
Full softly, that no man of Troy might hear, 
But only Achaea's chiefs, far from whose eyes 
Sleep hovered, so athirst were they for fight. 
They heard, and to Odysseus all inclined 
Their ears: he bade them urgently go forth 
Softly and fearlessly; and they obeyed 
That battle-summons, pressing in hot haste 
To leap to earth: but in his subtlety 
He stayed them from all thrusting eagerly forth. 
But first himself with swift unfaltering hands, 
Helped of Epeius, here and there unbarred 
The ribs of the Horse of beams: above the planks 
A little he raised his head, and gazed around 
On all sides, if he haply might descry 
One Trojan waking yet. As when a wolf, 
With hunger stung to the heart, comes from the hills, 
And ravenous for flesh draws nigh the flock 
Penned in the wide fold, slinking past the men 
And dogs that watch, all keen to ward the sheep, 
Then o'er the fold-wall leaps with soundless feet; 
So stole Odysseus down from the Horse: with him 
Followed the war-fain lords of Hellas' League, 
Orderly stepping down the ladders, which 
Epeius framed for paths of mighty men, 
For entering and for passing forth the Horse, 
Who down them now on this side, that side, streamed 
As fearless wasps startled by stroke of axe 
In angry mood pour all together forth 
From the tree-bole, at sound of woodman's blow; 
So battle-kindled forth the Horse they poured 
Into the midst of that strong city of Troy 
With hearts that leapt expectant. [With swift hands 
Snatched they the brands from dying hearths, and fired 
Temple and palace. Onward then to the gates 
Sped they,] and swiftly slew the slumbering guards, 
[Then held the gate-towers till their friends should come.]

Fast rowed the host the while; on swept the ships 
Over the great flood: Thetis made their paths 
Straight, and behind them sent a driving wind 
Speeding them, and the hearts Achaean glowed. 
Swiftly to Hellespont's shore they came, and there 
Beached they the keels again, and deftly dealt 
With whatso tackling appertains to ships. 
Then leapt they aland, and hasted on to Troy 
Silent as sheep that hurry to the fold 
From woodland pasture on an autumn eve; 
So without sound of voices marched they on 
Unto the Trojans' fortress, eager all 
To help those mighty chiefs with foes begirt. 
Now these -- as famished wolves fierce-glaring round 
Fall on a fold mid the long forest-hills, 
While sleeps the toil-worn watchman, and they rend 
The sheep on every hand within the wall 
In darkness, and all round [are heaped the slain; 
So these within the city smote and slew, 
As swarmed the awakened foe around them; yet, 
Fast as they slew, aye faster closed on them 
Those thousands, mad to thrust them from the gates.] 
Slipping in blood and stumbling o'er the dead 
[Their line reeled,] and destruction loomed o'er them, 
Though Danaan thousands near and nearer drew. 

But when the whole host reached the walls of Troy, 
Into the city of Priam, breathing rage 
Of fight, with reckless battle-lust they poured; 
And all that fortress found they full of war 
And slaughter, palaces, temples, horribly 
Blazing on all sides; glowed their hearts with joy. 
In deadly mood then charged they on the foe. 
Ares and fell Enyo maddened there: 
Blood ran in torrents, drenched was all the earth, 
As Trojans and their alien helpers died. 
Here were men lying quelled by bitter death 
All up and down the city in their blood; 
Others on them were falling, gasping forth 
Their life's strength; others, clutching in their hands 
Their bowels that looked through hideous gashes forth, 
Wandered in wretched plight around their homes: 
Others, whose feet, while yet asleep they lay, 
Had been hewn off, with groans unutterable 
Crawled mid the corpses. Some, who had rushed to fight, 
Lay now in dust, with hands and heads hewn off. 
Some were there, through whose backs, even as they fled,

The spear had passed, clear through to the breast, and some

Whose waists the lance had pierced, impaling them 
Where sharpest stings the anguish-laden steel. 
And all about the city dolorous howls 
Of dogs uprose, and miserable moans 
Of strong men stricken to death; and every home 
With awful cries was echoing. Rang the shrieks 
Of women, like to screams of cranes, which see 
An eagle stooping on them from the sky, 
Which have no courage to resist, but scream 
Long terror-shrieks in dread of Zeus's bird; 
So here, so there the Trojan women wailed, 
Some starting from their sleep, some to the ground 
Leaping: they thought not in that agony 
Of robe and zone; in naught but tunics clad 
Distraught they wandered: others found nor veil 
Nor cloak to cast about them, but, as came 
Onward their foes, they stood with beating hearts 
Trembling, as lettered by despair, essaying, 
All-hapless, with their hands alone to hide 
Their nakedness. And some in frenzy of woe: 
Their tresses tore, and beat their breasts, and screamed.

Others against that stormy torrent of foes 
Recklessly rushed, insensible of fear, 
Through mad desire to aid the perishing, 
Husbands or children; for despair had given 
High courage. Shrieks had startled from their sleep 
Soft little babes whose hearts had never known 
Trouble -- and there one with another lay 
Gasping their lives out! Some there were whose dreams 
Changed to a sudden vision of doom. All round 
The fell Fates gloated horribly o'er the slain. 
And even as swine be slaughtered in the court 
Of a rich king who makes his folk a feast, 
So without number were they slain. The wine 
Left in the mixing-bowls was blent with blood 
Gruesomely. No man bare a sword unstained 
With murder of defenceless folk of Troy, 
Though he were but a weakling in fair fight. 
And as by wolves or jackals sheep are torn, 
What time the furnace-breath of midnoon-heat 
Darts down, and all the flock beneath the shade 
Are crowded, and the shepherd is not there, 
But to the homestead bears afar their milk; 
And the fierce brutes leap on them, tear their throats, 
Gorge to the full their ravenous maws, and then 
Lap the dark blood, and linger still to slay 
All in mere lust of slaughter, and provide 
An evil banquet for that shepherd-lord; 
So through the city of Priam Danaans slew 
One after other in that last fight of all. 
No Trojan there was woundless, all men's limbs 
With blood in torrents spilt were darkly dashed. 

Nor seetheless were the Danaans in the fray: 
With beakers some were smitten, with tables some, 
Thrust in the eyes of some were burning brands 
Snatched from the hearth; some died transfixed with spits

Yet left within the hot flesh of the swine 
Whereon the red breath of the Fire-god beat; 
Others struck down by bills and axes keen 
Gasped in their blood: from some men's hands were shorn 
The fingers, who, in wild hope to escape 
The imminent death, had clutched the blades of swords. 
And here in that dark tumult one had hurled 
A stone, and crushed the crown of a friend's head. 
Like wild beasts trapped and stabbed within a fold 
On a lone steading, frenziedly they fought, 
Mad with despair-enkindled rage, beneath 
That night of horror. Hot with battle-lust 
Here, there, the fighters rushed and hurried through 
The palace of Priam. Many an Argive fell 
Spear-slain; for whatso Trojan in his halls 
Might seize a sword, might lift a spear in hand, 
Slew foes -- ay, heavy though he were with wine. 

Upflashed a glare unearthly through the town, 
For many an Argive bare in hand a torch 
To know in that dim battle friends from foes. 

Then Tydeus' son amid the war-storm met 
Spearman Coroebus, lordly Mygdon's son, 
And 'neath the left ribs pierced him with the lance 
Where run the life-ways of man's meat and drink; 
So met him black death borne upon the spear: 
Down in dark blood he fell mid hosts of slain. 
Ah fool! the bride he won not, Priam's child 
Cassandra, yea, his loveliest, for whose sake 
To Priam's burg but yesterday he came, 
And vaunted he would thrust the Argives back 
From Ilium. Never did the Gods fulfil 
His hope: the Fates hurled doom upon his head. 
With him the slayer laid Eurydamas low, 
Antenor's gallant son-in-law, who most 
For prudence was pre-eminent in Troy. 
Then met he Ilioneus the elder of days, 
And flashed his terrible sword forth. All the limbs 
Of that grey sire were palsied with his fear: 
He put forth trembling hands, with one he caught 
The swift avenging sword, with one he clasped 
The hero's knees. Despite his fury of war, 
A moment paused his wrath, or haply a God 
Held back the sword a space, that that old man 
Might speak to his fierce foe one word of prayer. 
Piteously cried he, terror-overwhelmed: 
"I kneel before thee, whosoe'er thou be 
Of mighty Argives. Oh compassionate 
My suppliant hands! Abate thy wrath! To slay 
The young and valiant is a glorious thing; 
But if thou smite an old man, small renown 
Waits on thy prowess. Therefore turn from me 
Thine hands against young men, if thou dost hope 
Ever to come to grey hairs such as mine." 

So spake he; but replied strong Tydeus' son: 
"Old man, I look to attain to honoured age; 
But while my Strength yet waxeth, will not I 
Spare any foe, but hurl to Hades all. 
The brave man makes an end of every foe." 

Then through his throat that terrible warrior drave 
The deadly blade, and thrust it straight to where 
The paths of man's life lead by swiftest way 
Blood-paved to doom: death palsied his poor strength 
By Diomedes' hands. Thence rushed he on 
Slaying the Trojans, storming in his might 
All through their fortress: pierced by his long spear 
Eurycoon fell, Perimnestor's son renowned. 
Amphimedon Aias slew: Agamemnon smote 
Damastor's son: Idomeneus struck down 
Mimas: by Meges Deiopites died. 

Achilles' son with his resistless lance 
Smote godlike Pammon; then his javelin pierced 
Polites in mid-rush: Antiphonus 
Dead upon these he laid, all Priam's sons. 
Agenor faced him in the fight, and fell: 
Hero on hero slew he; everywhere 
Stalked at his side Death's black doom manifest: 
Clad in his sire's might, whomso he met he slew. 
Last, on Troy's king in murderous mood he came. 
By Zeus the Hearth-lord's altar. Seeing him, 
Old Priam knew him and quaked not; for he longed 
Himself to lay his life down midst his sons; 
And craving death to Achilles' seed he spake: 
"Fierce-hearted son of Achilles strong in war, 
Slay me, and pity not my misery. 
I have no will to see the sun's light more, 
Who have suffered woes so many and so dread. 
With my sons would I die, and so forget 
Anguish and horror of war. Oh that thy sire 
Had slain me, ere mine eyes beheld aflame 
Illium, had slain me when I brought to him 
Ransom for Hector, whom thy father slew. 
He spared me -- so the Fates had spun my thread 
Of destiny. But thou, glut with my blood 
Thy fierce heart, and let me forget my pain." 
Answered Achilles' battle-eager son: 
"Fain am I, yea, in haste to grant thy prayer. 
A foe like thee will I not leave alive; 
For naught is dearer unto men than life." 

With one stroke swept he off that hoary head 
Lightly as when a reaper lops an ear 
In a parched cornfield at the harvest-tide. 
With lips yet murmuring low it rolled afar 
From where with quivering limbs the body lay 
Amidst dark-purple blood and slaughtered men. 
So lay he, chiefest once of all the world 
In lineage, wealth, in many and goodly sons. 
Ah me, not long abides the honour of man, 
But shame from unseen ambush leaps on him 
So clutched him Doom, so he forgat his woes. 

Yea, also did those Danaan car-lords hurl 
From a high tower the babe Astyanax, 
Dashing him out of life. They tore the child 
Out of his mother's arms, in wrathful hate 
Of Hector, who in life had dealt to them 
Such havoc; therefore hated they his seed, 
And down from that high rampart flung his child -- 
A wordless babe that nothing knew of war! 
As when amid the mountains hungry wolves 
Chase from the mother's side a suckling calf, 
And with malignant cunning drive it o'er 
An echoing cliffs edge, while runs to and fro 
Its dam with long moans mourning her dear child, 
And a new evil followeth hard on her, 
For suddenly lions seize her for a prey; 
So, as she agonized for her son, the foe 
To bondage haled with other captive thralls 
That shrieking daughter of King Eetion. 
Then, as on those three fearful deaths she thought 
Of husband, child, and father, Andromaehe 
Longed sore to die. Yea, for the royally-born 
Better it is to die in war, than do 
The service of the thrall to baser folk. 
All piteously the broken-hearted cried: 
"Oh hurl my body also from the wall, 
Or down the cliff, or cast me midst the fire, 
Ye Argives! Woes are mine unutterable! 
For Peleus' son smote down my noble father 
In Thebe, and in Troy mine husband slew, 
Who unto me was all mine heart's desire, 
Who left me in mine halls one little child, 
My darling and my pride -- of all mine hopes 
In him fell merciless Fate hath cheated me! 
Oh therefore thrust this broken-hearted one 
Now out of life! Hale me not overseas 
Mingled with spear-thralls; for my soul henceforth 
Hath no more pleasure in life, since God hath slain 
My nearest and my dearest! For me waits 
Trouble and anguish and lone homelessness!" 

So cried she, longing for the grave; for vile 
Is life to them whose glory is swallowed up 
Of shame: a horror is the scorn of men. 
But, spite her prayers, to thraldom dragged they her. 

In all the homes of Troy lay dying men, 
And rose from all a lamentable cry, 
Save only Antenor's halls; for unto him 
The Argives rendered hospitality's debt, 
For that in time past had his roof received 
And sheltered godlike Menelaus, when 
He with Odysseus came to claim his own. 
Therefore the mighty sons of Achaea showed 
Grace to him, as to a friend, and spared his life 
And substance, fearing Themis who seeth all. 

Then also princely Anchises' noble son -- 
Hard had he fought through Priam's burg that night 
With spear and valour, and many had he slain -- 
When now he saw the city set aflame 
By hands of foes, saw her folk perishing 
In multitudes, her treasures spoiled, her wives 
And children dragged to thraldom from their homes, 
No more he hoped to see the stately walls 
Of his birth-city, but bethought him now 
How from that mighty ruin to escape. 
And as the helmsman of a ship, who toils 
On the deep sea, and matches all his craft 
Against the winds and waves from every side 
Rushing against him in the stormy time, 
Forspent at last, both hand and heart, when now 
The ship is foundering in the surge, forsakes 
The helm, to launch forth in a little boat, 
And heeds no longer ship and lading; so 
Anchises' gallant son forsook the town 
And left her to her foes, a sea of fire. 
His son and father alone he snatched from death; 
The old man broken down with years he set 
On his broad shoulders with his own strong hands, 
And led the young child by his small soft hand, 
Whose little footsteps lightly touched the ground; 
And, as he quaked to see that work of deaths 
His father led him through the roar of fight, 
And clinging hung on him the tender child, 
Tears down his soft cheeks streaming. But the man 
O'er many a body sprang with hurrying feet, 
And in the darkness in his own despite 
Trampled on many. Cypris guided them, 
Earnest to save from that wild ruin her son, 
His father, and his child. As on he pressed, 
The flames gave back before him everywhere: 
The blast of the Fire-god's breath to right and left 
Was cloven asunder. Spears and javelins hurled 
Against him by the Achaeans harmless fell. 
Also, to stay them, Calchas cried aloud: 
"Forbear against Aeneas' noble head 
To hurl the bitter dart, the deadly spear! 
Fated he is by the high Gods' decree 
To pass from Xanthus, and by Tiber's flood 
To found a city holy and glorious 
Through all time, and to rule o'er tribes of men 
Far-sundered. Of his seed shall lords of earth 
Rule from the rising to the setting sun. 
Yea, with the Immortals ever shall he dwell, 
Who is son of Aphrodite lovely-tressed. 
From him too is it meet we hold our hands 
Because he hath preferred his father and son 
To gold, to all things that might profit a man 
Who fleeth exiled to an alien land. 
This one night hath revealed to us a man 
Faithful to death to his father and his child." 

Then hearkened they, and as a God did all 
Look on him. Forth the city hasted he 
Whither his feet should bear him, while the foe 
Made havoc still of goodly-builded Troy. 

Then also Menelaus in Helen's bower 
Found, heavy with wine, ill-starred Deiphobus, 
And slew him with the sword: but she had fled 
And hidden her in the palace. O'er the blood 
Of that slain man exulted he, and cried: 
"Dog! I, even I have dealt thee unwelcome death 
This day! No dawn divine shall meet thee again 
Alive in Troy -- ay, though thou vaunt thyself 
Spouse of the child of Zeus the thunder-voiced! 
Black death hath trapped thee slain in my wife's bower! 
Would I had met Alexander too in fight 
Ere this, and plucked his heart out! So my grief 
Had been a lighter load. But he hath paid 
Already justice' debt, hath passed beneath 
Death's cold dark shadow. Ha, small joy to thee 
My wife was doomed to bring! Ay, wicked men 
Never elude pure Themis: night and day 
Her eyes are on them, and the wide world through 
Above the tribes of men she floats in air, 
Holpen of Zeus, for punishment of sin." 

On passed he, dealing merciless death to foes, 
For maddened was his soul with jealousy. 
Against the Trojans was his bold heart full 
Of thoughts of vengeance, which were now fulfilled 
By the dread Goddess Justice, for that theirs 
Was that first outrage touching Helen, theirs 
That profanation of the oaths, and theirs 
That trampling on the blood of sacrifice 
When their presumptuous souls forgat the Gods. 
Therefore the Vengeance-friends brought woes on them 
Thereafter, and some died in fighting field, 
Some now in Troy by board and bridal bower. 

Menelaus mid the inner chambers found 
At last his wife, there cowering from the wrath 
Of her bold-hearted lord. He glared on her, 
Hungering to slay her in his jealous rage. 
But winsome Aphrodite curbed him, struck 
Out of his hand the sword, his onrush reined, 
Jealousy's dark cloud swept she away, and stirred 
Love's deep sweet well-springs in his heart and eyes. 
Swept o'er him strange amazement: powerless all 
Was he to lift the sword against her neck, 
Seeing her splendour of beauty. Like a stock 
Of dead wood in a mountain forest, which 
No swiftly-rushing blasts of north-winds shake, 
Nor fury of south-winds ever, so he stood, 
So dazed abode long time. All his great strength 
Was broken, as he looked upon his wife. 
And suddenly had he forgotten all 
Yea, all her sins against her spousal-troth; 
For Aphrodite made all fade away, 
She who subdueth all immortal hearts 
And mortal. Yet even so he lifted up 
From earth his sword, and made as he would rush 
Upon his wife but other was his intent, 
Even as he sprang: he did but feign, to cheat 
Achaean eyes. Then did his brother stay 
His fury, and spake with pacifying words, 
Fearing lest all they had toiled for should be lost: 
"Forbear wrath, Menelaus, now: 'twere shame 
To slay thy wedded wife, for whose sake we 
Have suffered much affliction, while we sought 
Vengeance on Priam. Not, as thou dost deem, 
Was Helen's the sin, but his who set at naught 
The Guest-lord, and thine hospitable board; 
So with death-pangs hath God requited him." 

Then hearkened Menelaus to his rede. 
But the Gods, palled in dark clouds, mourned for Troy, 
A ruined glory save fair-tressed Tritonis 
And Hera: their hearts triumphed, when they saw 
The burg of god-descended Priam destroyed. 
Yet not the wise heart Trito-born herself 
Was wholly tearless; for within her fane 
Outraged Cassandra was of Oileus son 
Lust-maddened. But grim vengeance upon him 
Ere long the Goddess wreaked, repaying insult 
With mortal sufferance. Yea, she would not look 
Upon the infamy, but clad herself 
With shame and wrath as with a cloak: she turned 
Her stern eyes to the temple-roof, and groaned 
The holy image, and the hallowed floor 
Quaked mightily. Yet did he not forbear 
His mad sin, for his soul was lust-distraught. 

Here, there, on all sides crumbled flaming homes 
In ruin down: scorched dust with smoke was blent: 
Trembled the streets to the awful thunderous crash. 
Here burned Aeneas' palace, yonder flamed 
Antimachus' halls: one furnace was the height 
Of fair-built Pergamus; flames were roaring round 
Apollo's temple, round Athena's fane, 
And round the Hearth-lord's altar: flames licked up 
Fair chambers of the sons' sons of a king; 
And all the city sank down into hell. 

Of Trojans some by Argos' sons were slain, 
Some by their own roofs crashing down in fire, 
Giving at once in death and tomb to them: 
Some in their own throats plunged the steel, when foes 
And fire were in the porch together seen: 
Some slew their wives and children, and flung themselves

Dead on them, when despair had done its work 
Of horror. One, who deemed the foe afar, 
Caught up a vase, and, fain to quench the flame, 
Hasted for water. Leapt unmarked on him 
An Argive, and his spirit, heavy with wine, 
Was thrust forth from the body by the spear. 
Clashed the void vase above him, as he fell 
Backward within the house. As through his hall 
Another fled, the burning roof-beam crashed 
Down on his head, and swift death came with it. 
And many women, as in frenzied flight 
They rushed forth, suddenly remembered babes 
Left in their beds beneath those burning roofs: 
With wild feet sped they back -- the house fell in 
Upon them, and they perished, mother and child. 
Horses and dogs in panic through the town 
Fled from the flames, trampling beneath their feet 
The dead, and dashing into living men 
To their sore hurt. Shrieks rang through all the town. 
In through his blazing porchway rushed a man 
To rescue wife and child. Through smoke and flame 
Blindly he groped, and perished while he cried 
Their names, and pitiless doom slew those within. 

The fire-glow upward mounted to the sky, 
The red glare o'er the firmament spread its wings, 
And all the tribes of folk that dwelt around 
Beheld it, far as Ida's mountain-crests, 
And sea-girt Tenedos, and Thracian Samos. 
And men that voyaged on the deep sea cried: 
"The Argives have achieved their mighty task 
After long toil for star-eyed Helen's sake. 
All Troy, the once queen-city, burns in fire: 
For all their prayers, no God defends them now; 
For strong Fate oversees all works of men, 
And the renownless and obscure to fame 
She raises, and brings low the exalted ones. 
Oft out of good is evil brought, and good 
From evil, mid the travail and change of life." 

So spake they, who from far beheld the glare 
Of Troy's great burning. Compassed were her folk 
With wailing misery: through her streets the foe 
Exulted, as when madding blasts turmoil 
The boundless sea, what time the Altar ascends 
To heaven's star-pavement, turned to the misty south 
Overagainst Arcturus tempest-breathed, 
And with its rising leap the wild winds forth, 
And ships full many are whelmed 'neath ravening seas; 
Wild as those stormy winds Achaea's sons 
Ravaged steep Ilium while she burned in flame. 
As when a mountain clothed with shaggy woods 
Burns swiftly in a fire-blast winged with winds, 
And from her tall peaks goeth up a roar, 
And all the forest-children this way and that 
Rush through the wood, tormented by the flame; 
So were the Trojans perishing: there was none 
To save, of all the Gods. Round these were staked 
The nets of Fate, which no man can escape. 

Then were Demophoon and Acamas 
By mighty Theseus' mother Aethra met. 
Yearning to see them was she guided on 
To meet them by some Blessed One, the while 
'Wildered from war and fire she fled. They saw 
In that red glare a woman royal-tall, 
Imperial-moulded, and they weened that this 
Was Priam's queen, and with swift eagerness 
Laid hands on her, to lead her captive thence 
To the Danaans; but piteously she moaned: 
"Ah, do not, noble sons of warrior Greeks, 
To your ships hale me, as I were a foe! 
I am not of Trojan birth: of Danaans came 
My princely blood renowned. In Troezen's halls 
Pittheus begat me, Aegeus wedded me, 
And of my womb sprang Theseus glory-crowned. 
For great Zeus' sake, for your dear parents' sake, 
I pray you, if the seed of Theseus came 
Hither with Atreus' sons, O bring ye me 
Unto their yearning eyes. I trow they be 
Young men like you. My soul shall be refreshed 
If living I behold those chieftains twain." 

Hearkening to her they called their sire to mind, 
His deeds for Helen's sake, and how the sons 
Of Zeus the Thunderer in the old time smote 
Aphidnae, when, because these were but babes, 
Their nurses hid them far from peril of fight; 
And Aethra they remembered -- all she endured 
Through wars, as mother-in-law at first, and thrall 
Thereafter of Helen. Dumb for joy were they, 
Till spake Demophoon to that wistful one: 
"Even now the Gods fulfil thine heart's desire: 
We whom thou seest are the sons of him, 
Thy noble son: thee shall our loving hands 
Bear to the ships: with joy to Hellas' soil 
Thee will we bring, where once thou wast a queen." 

Then his great father's mother clasped him round 
With clinging arms: she kissed his shoulders broad, 
His head, his breast, his bearded lips she kissed, 
And Acamas kissed withal, the while she shed 
Glad tears on these who could not choose but weep. 
As when one tarries long mid alien men, 
And folk report him dead, but suddenly 
He cometh home: his children see his face, 
And break into glad weeping; yea, and he, 
His arms around them, and their little heads 
Upon his shoulders, sobs: echoes the home 
With happy mourning's music-beating wings; 
So wept they with sweet sighs and sorrowless moans. 

Then, too, affliction-burdened Priam's child, 
Laodice, say they, stretched her hands to heaven, 
Praying the mighty Gods that earth might gape 
To swallow her, ere she defiled her hand 
With thralls' work; and a God gave ear, and rent 
Deep earth beneath her: so by Heaven's decree 
Did earth's abysmal chasm receive the maid 
In Troy's last hour. Electra's self withal, 
The Star-queen lovely-robed, shrouded her form 
In mist and cloud, and left the Pleiad-band, 
Her sisters, as the olden legend tells. 
Still riseth up in sight of toil-worn men 
Their bright troop in the skies; but she alone 
Hides viewless ever, since the hallowed town 
Of her son Dardanus in ruin fell, 
When Zeus most high from heaven could help her not, 
Because to Fate the might of Zeus must bow; 
And by the Immortals' purpose all these things 
Had come to pass, or by Fate's ordinance. 

Still on Troy's folk the Argives wreaked their wrath, 
And battle's issues Strife Incarnate held. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK XIV

How the Conquerors Sailed from Troy Unto Judgment of Tempest and
Shipwreck 

Then rose from Ocean Dawn the golden-throned 
Up to the heavens; night into Chaos sank. 
And now the Argives spoiled fair-fenced Troy, 
And took her boundless treasures for a prey. 
Like river-torrents seemed they, that sweep down, 
By rain, floods swelled, in thunder from the hills, 
And seaward hurl tall trees and whatsoe'er 
Grows on the mountains, mingled with the wreck 
Of shattered cliff and crag; so the long lines 
Of Danaans who had wasted Troy with fire 
Seemed, streaming with her plunder to the ships. 
Troy's daughters therewithal in scattered bands 
They haled down seaward -- virgins yet unwed, 
And new-made brides, and matrons silver-haired, 
And mothers from whose bosoms foes had torn 
Babes for the last time closing lips on breasts. 

Amidst of these Menelaus led his wife 
Forth of the burning city, having wrought 
A mighty triumph -- joy and shame were his. 
Cassandra heavenly-fair was haled the prize 
Of Agamemnon: to Achilles' son 
Andromache had fallen: Hecuba 
Odysseus dragged unto his ship. The tears 
Poured from her eyes as water from a spring; 
Trembled her limbs, fear-frenzied was her heart; 
Rent were her hoary tresses and besprent 
With ashes of the hearth, cast by her hands 
When she saw Priam slain and Troy aflame. 
And aye she deeply groaned for thraldom's day 
That trapped her vainly loth. Each hero led 
A wailing Trojan woman to his ship. 
Here, there, uprose from these the wild lament, 
The woeful-mingling cries of mother and babe. 
As when with white-tusked swine the herdmen drive 
Their younglings from the hill-pens to the plain 
As winter closeth in, and evermore 
Each answereth each with mingled plaintive cries; 
So moaned Troy's daughters by their foes enslaved, 
Handmaid and queen made one in thraldom's lot. 

But Helen raised no lamentation: shame 
Sat on her dark-blue eyes, and cast its flush 
Over her lovely cheeks. Her heart beat hard 
With sore misgiving, lest, as to the ships 
She passed, the Achaeans might mishandle her. 
Therefore with fluttering soul she trembled sore; 
And, her head darkly mantled in her veil, 
Close-following trod she in her husband's steps, 
With cheek shame-crimsoned, like the Queen of Love, 
What time the Heaven-abiders saw her clasped 
In Ares' arms, shaming in sight of all 
The marriage-bed, trapped in the myriad-meshed 
Toils of Hephaestus: tangled there she lay 
In agony of shame, while thronged around 
The Blessed, and there stood Hephaestus' self: 
For fearful it is for wives to be beheld 
By husbands' eyes doing the deed of shame. 
Lovely as she in form and roseate blush 
Passed Helen mid the Trojan captives on 
To the Argive ships. But the folk all around 
Marvelled to see the glory of loveliness 
Of that all-flawless woman. No man dared 
Or secretly or openly to cast 
Reproach on her. As on a Goddess all 
Gazed on her with adoring wistful eyes. 
As when to wanderers on a stormy sea, 
After long time and passion of prayer, the sight 
Of fatherland is given; from deadly deeps 
Escaped, they stretch hands to her joyful-souled; 
So joyed the Danaans all, no man of them 
Remembered any more war's travail and pain. 
Such thoughts Cytherea stirred in them, for grace 
To Helen starry-eyed, and Zeus her sire. 

Then, when he saw that burg beloved destroyed, 
Xanthus, scarce drawing breath from bloody war, 
Mourned with his Nymphs for ruin fallen on Troy, 
Mourned for the city of Priam blotted out. 
As when hail lashes a field of ripened wheat, 
And beats it small, and smites off all the ears 
With merciless scourge, and levelled with the ground 
Are stalks, and on the earth is all the grain 
Woefully wasted, and the harvest's lord 
Is stricken with deadly grief; so Xanthus' soul 
Was utterly whelmed in grief for Ilium made 
A desolation; grief undying was his, 
Immortal though he was. Mourned Simois 
And long-ridged Ida: all who on Ida dwelt 
Wailed from afar the ruin of Priam's town. 

But with loud laughter of glee the Argives sought 
Their galleys, chanting the triumphant might 
Of victory, chanting now the Blessed Gods, 
Now their own valour, and Epeius' work 
Ever renowned. Their song soared up to heaven, 
Like multitudinous cries of daws, when breaks 
A day of sunny calm and windless air 
After a ruining storm: from their glad hearts 
So rose the joyful clamour, till the Gods 
Heard and rejoiced in heaven, all who had helped 
With willing hands the war-fain Argive men. 
But chafed those others which had aided Troy, 
Beholding Priam's city wrapped in flame, 
Yet powerless for her help to override 
Fate; for not Cronos' Son can stay the hand 
Of Destiny, whose might transcendeth all 
The Immortals, and Zeus sanctioneth all her deeds. 

The Argives on the flaming altar-wood 
Laid many thighs of oxen, and made haste 
To spill sweet wine on their burnt offerings, 
Thanking the Gods for that great work achieved. 
And loudly at the feast they sang the praise 
Of all the mailed men whom the Horse of Tree 
Had ambushed. Far-famed Sinon they extolled 
For that dire torment he endured of foes; 
Yea, song and honour-guerdons without end 
All rendered him: and that resolved soul 
Glad-hearted joyed for the Argives victory, 
And for his own misfeaturing sorrowed not. 
For to the wise and prudent man renown 
Is better far than gold, than goodlihead, 
Than all good things men have or hope to win. 

So, feasting by the ships all void of fear, 
Cried one to another ever and anon: 
"We have touched the goal of this long war, have won 
Glory, have smitten our foes and their great town! 
Now grant, O Zeus, to our prayers safe home-return!" 
But not to all the Sire vouchsafed return. 

Then rose a cunning harper in their midst. 
And sang the song of triumph and of peace 
Re-won, and with glad hearts untouched by care 
They heard; for no more fear of war had they, 
But of sweet toil of law-abiding days 
And blissful, fleeting hours henceforth they dreamed. 
All the War's Story in their eager ears 
He sang -- how leagued peoples gathering met 
At hallowed Aulis -- how the invincible strength 
Of Peleus' son smote fenced cities twelve 
In sea-raids, how he marched o'er leagues on leagues 
Of land, and spoiled eleven -- all he wrought 
In fight with Telephus and Eetion -- 
How he slew giant Cycnus -- all the toil 
Of war that through Achilles' wrath befell 
The Achaeans -- how he dragged dead Hector round 
His own Troy's wall, and how he slew in fight 
Penthesileia and Tithonus' son: -- 
How Aias laid low Glaucus, lord of spears, 
Then sang he how the child of Aeacus' son 
Struck down Eurypylus, and how the shafts 
Of Philoctetes dealt to Paris death. 
Then the song named all heroes who passed in 
To ambush in the Horse of Guile, and hymned 
The fall of god-descended Priam's burg; 
The feast he sang last, and peace after war; 
Then many another, as they listed, sang. 

But when above those feasters midnight's stars 
Hung, ceased the Danaans from the feast and wine, 
And turned to sleep's forgetfulness of care, 
For that with yesterday's war-travail all 
Were wearied; wherefore they, who fain all night 
Had revelled, needs must cease: how loth soe'er, 
Sleep drew them thence; here, there, soft slumbered they.

But in his tent Menelaus lovingly 
With bright-haired Helen spake; for on their eyes 
Sleep had not fallen yet. The Cyprian Queen 
Brooded above their souls, that olden love 
Might be renewed, and heart-ache chased away. 

Helen first brake the silence, and she said: 
"O Menelaus, be not wroth with me! 
Not of my will I left thy roof, thy bed, 
But Alexander and the sons of Troy 
Came upon me, and snatched away, when thou 
Wast far thence. Oftentimes did I essay 
By the death-noose to perish wretchedly, 
Or by the bitter sword; but still they stayed 
Mine hand, and still spake comfortable words 
To salve my grief for thee and my sweet child. 
For her sake, for the sake of olden love, 
And for thine own sake, I beseech thee now, 
Forget thy stern displeasure against thy wife." 

Answered her Menelaus wise of wit: 
"No more remember past griefs: seal them up 
Hid in thine heart. Let all be locked within 
The dim dark mansion of forgetfulness. 
What profits it to call ill deeds to mind?" 

Glad was she then: fear flitted from her heart, 
And came sweet hope that her lord's wrath was dead. 
She cast her arms around him, and their eyes 
With tears were brimming as they made sweet moan; 
And side by side they laid them, and their hearts 
Thrilled with remembrance of old spousal joy. 
And as a vine and ivy entwine their stems 
Each around other, that no might of wind 
Avails to sever them, so clung these twain 
Twined in the passionate embrace of love. 

When came on these too sorrow-drowning sleep, 
Even then above his son's head rose and stood 
Godlike Achilles' mighty shade, in form 
As when he lived, the Trojans' bane, the joy 
Of Greeks, and kissed his neck and flashing eyes 
Lovingly, and spake comfortable words: 
"All hail, my son! Vex not thine heart with grief 
For thy dead sire; for with the Blessed Gods 
Now at the feast I sit. Refrain thy soul 
From sorrow, and plant my strength within thy mind. 
Be foremost of the Argives ever; yield 
To none in valour, but in council bow 
Before thine elders: so shall all acclaim 
Thy courtesy. Honour princely men and wise; 
For the true man is still the true man's friend, 
Even as the vile man cleaveth to the knave. 
If good thy thought be, good shall be thy deeds: 
But no man shall attain to Honour's height, 
Except his heart be right within: her stem 
Is hard to climb, and high in heaven spread 
Her branches: only they whom strength and toil 
Attend, strain up to pluck her blissful fruit, 
Climbing the Tree of Honour glow-crowned. 
Thou therefore follow fame, and let thy soul 
Be not in sorrow afflicted overmuch, 
Nor in prosperity over-glad. To friends, 
To comrades, child and wife, be kindly of heart, 
Remembering still that near to all men stand 
The gates of doom, the mansions of the dead: 
For humankind are like the flower of grass, 
The blossom of spring; these fade the while those bloom:

Therefore be ever kindly with thy kind. 
Now to the Argives say -- to Atreus' son 
Agamemnon chiefly -- if my battle-toil 
Round Priam's walls, and those sea-raids I led 
Or ever I set foot on Trojan land, 
Be in their hearts remembered, to my tomb 
Be Priam's daughter Polyxeina led -- 
Whom as my portion of the spoil I claim -- 
And sacrificed thereon: else shall my wrath 
Against them more than for Briseis burn. 
The waves of the great deep will I turmoil 
To bar their way, upstirring storm on storm, 
That through their own mad folly pining away 
Here they may linger long, until to me 
They pour drink-offerings, yearning sore for home. 
But, when they have slain the maiden, I grudge not 
That whoso will may bury her far from me." 

Then as a wind-breath swift he fleeted thence, 
And came to the Elysian Plain, whereto 
A path to heaven reacheth, for the feet 
Ascending and descending of the Blest. 
Then the son started up from sleep, and called 
His sire to mind, and glowed the heart in him. 

When to wide heaven the Child of Mist uprose, 
Scattering night, unveiling earth and air, 
Then from their rest upsprang Achaea's sons 
Yearning for home. With laughter 'gan they hale 
Down to the sea the keels: but lo, their haste 
Was reined in by Achilles' mighty son: 

He assembled them, and told his sire's behest: 
"Hearken, dear sons of Argives battle-staunch, 
To this my glorious father's hest, to me 
Spoken in darkness slumbering on my bed: 
He saith, he dwells with the Immortal Gods: 
He biddeth you and Atreus' son the king 
To bring, as his war-guerdon passing-fair, 
To his dim dark tomb Polyxeina queenly-robed, 
To slay her there, but far thence bury her. 
But if ye slight him, and essay to sail 
The sea, he threateneth to stir up the waves 
To bar your path upon the deep, and here 
Storm-bound long time to hold you, ships and men." 

Then hearkened they, and as to a God they prayed; 
For even now a storm-blast on the sea 
Upheaved the waves, broad-backed and thronging fast 
More than before beneath the madding wind. 
Tossed the great deep, smit by Poseidon's hands 
For a grace to strong Achilles. All the winds 
Swooped on the waters. Prayed the Dardans all 
To Achilles, and a man to his fellow cried: 
"Great Zeus's seed Achilles verily was; 
Therefore is he a God, who in days past 
Dwelt among us; for lapse of dateless time 
Makes not the sons of Heaven to fade away." 

Then to Achilles' tomb the host returned, 
And led the maid, as calf by herdmen dragged 
For sacrifice, from woodland pastures torn 
From its mother's side, and lowing long and loud 
It moans with anguished heart; so Priam's child 
Wailed in the hands of foes. Down streamed her tears 
As when beneath the heavy sacks of sand 
Olives clear-skinned, ne'er blotched by drops of storm, 
Pour out their oil, when the long levers creak 
As strong men strain the cords; so poured the tears 
Of travail-burdened Priam's daughter, haled 
To stern Achilles' tomb, tears blent with moans. 
Drenched were her bosom-folds, glistened the drops 
On flesh clear-white as costly ivory. 

Then, to crown all her griefs, yet sharper pain 
Fell on the heart of hapless Hecuba. 
Then did her soul recall that awful dream, 
The vision of sleep of that night overpast: 
Herseemed that on Achilles' tomb she stood 
Moaning, her hair down-streaming to the ground, 
And from her breasts blood dripped to earth the while, 
And drenched the tomb. Fear-haunted touching this, 
Foreboding all calamity, she wailed 
Piteously; far rang her wild lament. 
As a dog moaning at her master's door, 
Utters long howls, her teats with milk distent, 
Whose whelps, ere their eyes opened to the light, 
Her lords afar have flung, a prey to kites; 
And now with short sharp cries she plains, and now 
Long howling: the weird outcry thrills the air; 
So wailed and shrieked for her child Hecuba: 
"Ah me! what sorrows first or last shall I 
Lament heart-anguished, who am full of woes? 
Those unimagined ills my sons, my king 
Have suffered? or my city, or daughters shamed? 
Or my despair, my day of slavery? 
Oh, the grim fates have caught me in a net 
Of manifold ills! O child, they have spun for thee 
Dread weird of unimagined misery! 
They have thrust thee away, when near was Hymen"s hymn, 
From thine espousals, marked thee for destruction 
Dark, unendurable, unspeakable! 
For lo, a dead man's heart, Achilles' heart, 
Is by our blood made warm with life to-day! 
O child, dear child, that I might die with thee, 
That earth might swallow me, ere I see thy doom!" 
So cried she, weeping never-ceasing tears, 
For grief on bitter grief encompassed her. 
But when these reached divine Achilles' tomb, 
Then did his son unsheathe the whetted sword, 
His left hand grasped the maid, and his right hand 
Was laid upon the tomb, and thus he cried: 
"Hear, father, thy son's prayer, hear all the prayers 
Of Argives, and be no more wroth with us! 
Lo, unto thee now all thine heart's desire 
Will we fulfil. Be gracious to us thou, 
And to our praying grant sweet home-return." 

Into the maid's throat then he plunged the blade 
Of death: the dear life straightway sobbed she forth, 
With the last piteous moan of parting breath. 
Face-downward to the earth she fell: all round 
Her flesh was crimsoned from her neck, as snow 
Stained on a mountain-side with scarlet blood 
Rushing, from javelin-smitten boar or bear. 
The maiden's corpse then gave they, to be borne 
Unto the city, to Antenor's home, 
For that, when Troy yet stood, he nurtured her 
In his fair halls, a bride for his own son 
Eurymachus. The old man buried her, 
King Priam's princess-child, nigh his own house, 
By Ganymedes' shrine, and overagainst 
The temple of Pallas the Unwearied One. 
Then were the waves stilled, and the blast was hushed 
To sleep, and all the sea-flood lulled to calm. 

Swift with glad laughter hied they to the ships, 
Hymning Achilles and the Blessed Ones. 
A feast they made, first severing thighs of kine 
For the Immortals. Gladsome sacrifice 
Steamed on all sides: in cups of silver and gold 
They drank sweet wine: their hearts leaped up with hope 
Of winning to their fatherland again. 
But when with meats and wine all these were filled, 
Then in their eager ears spake Neleus' son: 
"Hear, friends, who have 'scaped the long turmoil of war,

That I may say to you one welcome word: 
Now is the hour of heart's delight, the hour 
Of home-return. Away! Achilles soul 
Hath ceased from ruinous wrath; Earth-shaker stills 
The stormy wave, and gentle breezes blow; 
No more the waves toss high. Haste, hale the ships 
Down to the sea. Now, ho for home-return!" 

Eager they heard, and ready made the ships. 
Then was a marvellous portent seen of men; 
For all-unhappy Priam's queen was changed 
From woman's form into a pitiful hound; 
And all men gathered round in wondering awe. 
Then all her body a God transformed to stone -- 
A mighty marvel for men yet unborn! 
At Calchas' bidding this the Achaeans bore 
In a swift ship to Hellespont's far side. 
Then down to the sea in haste they ran the keels: 
Their wealth they laid aboard, even all the spoil 
Taken, or ever unto Troy they came, 
From conquered neighbour peoples; therewithal 
Whatso they took from Ilium, wherein most 
They joyed, for untold was the sum thereof. 
And followed with them many a captive maid 
With anguished heart: so went they aboard the ships. 
But Calchas would not with that eager host 
Launch forth; yea, he had fain withheld therefrom 
All the Achaeans, for his prophet-soul 
Foreboded dread destruction looming o'er 
The Argives by the Rocks Capherean. 
But naught they heeded him; malignant 
Fate Deluded men's souls: only Amphilochus 
The wise in prophet-lore, the gallant son 
Of princely Amphiaraus, stayed with him. 
Fated were these twain, far from their own land, 
To reach Pamphylian and Cilician burgs; 
And this the Gods thereafter brought to pass. 

But now the Achaeans cast the hawsers loose 
From shore: in haste they heaved the anchor-stones. 
Roared Hellespont beneath swift-flashing oars; 
Crashed the prows through the sea. About the bows 
Much armour of slain foes was lying heaped: 
Along the bulwarks victory-trophies hung 
Countless. With garlands wreathed they all the ships, 
Their heads, the spears, the shields wherewith they had fought

Against their foes. The chiefs stood on the prows, 
And poured into the dark sea once and again 
Wine to the Gods, to grant them safe return. 
But with the winds their prayers mixed; far away 
Vainly they floated blent with cloud and air. 

With anguished hearts the captive maids looked back 
On Ilium, and with sobs and moans they wailed, 
Striving to hide their grief from Argive eyes. 
Clasping their knees some sat; in misery some 
Veiled with their hands their faces; others nursed 
Young children in their arms: those innocents 
Not yet bewailed their day of bondage, nor 
Their country's ruin; all their thoughts were set 
On comfort of the breast, for the babe's heart 
Hath none affinity with sorrow. All 
Sat with unbraided hair and pitiful breasts 
Scored with their fingers. On their cheeks there lay 
Stains of dried tears, and streamed thereover now 
Fresh tears full fast, as still they gazed aback 
On the lost hapless home, wherefrom yet rose 
The flames, and o'er it writhed the rolling smoke. 
Now on Cassandra marvelling they gazed, 
Calling to mind her prophecy of doom; 
But at their tears she laughed in bitter scorn, 
In anguish for the ruin of her land. 

Such Trojans as had scaped from pitiless war 
Gathered to render now the burial-dues 
Unto their city's slain. Antenor led 
To that sad work: one pyre for all they raised. 

But laughed with triumphing hearts the Argive men, 
As now with oars they swept o'er dark sea-ways, 
Now hastily hoised the sails high o'er the ships, 
And fleeted fast astern Dardania-land, 
And Hero Achilles' tomb. But now their hearts, 
How blithe soe'er, remembered comrades slain, 
And sorely grieved, and wistfully they looked 
Back to the alien's land; it seemed to them 
Aye sliding farther from their ships. Full soon 
By Tenedos' beaches slipt they: now they ran 
By Chrysa, Sminthian Phoebus' holy place, 
And hallowed Cilla. Far away were glimpsed 
The windy heights of Lesbos. Rounded now 
Was Lecton's foreland, where is the last peak 
Of Ida. In the sails loud hummed the wind, 
Crashed round the prows the dark surge: the long waves 
Showed shadowy hollows, far the white wake gleamed. 

Now had the Argives all to the hallowed soil 
Of Hellas won, by perils of the deep 
Unscathed, but for Athena Daughter of Zeus 
The Thunderer, and her indignation's wrath. 
When nigh Euboea's windy heights they drew, 
She rose, in anger unappeasable 
Against the Locrian king, devising doom 
Crushing and pitiless, and drew nigh to Zeus 
Lord of the Gods, and spake to him apart 
In wrath that in her breast would not be pent: 
"Zeus, Father, unendurable of Gods 
Is men's presumption! They reck not of thee, 
Of none of the Blessed reck they, forasmuch 
As vengeance followeth after sin no more; 
And ofttimes more afflicted are good men 
Than evil, and their misery hath no end. 
Therefore no man regardeth justice: shame 
Lives not with men! And I, I will not dwell 
Hereafter in Olympus, not be named 
Thy daughter, if I may not be avenged 
On the Achaeans' reckless sin! Behold, 
Within my very temple Oileus' son 
Hath wrought iniquity, hath pitied not 
Cassandra stretching unregarded hands 
Once and again to me; nor did he dread 
My might, nor reverenced in his wicked heart 
The Immortal, but a deed intolerable 
He did. Therefore let not thy spirit divine 
Begrudge mine heart's desire, that so all men 
May quake before the manifest wrath of Gods." 

Answered the Sire with heart-assuaging words: 
"Child, not for the Argives' sake withstand I thee; 
But all mine armoury which the Cyclops' might 
To win my favour wrought with tireless hands, 
To thy desire I give. O strong heart, hurl 
A ruining storm thyself on the Argive fleet." 

Then down before the aweless Maid he cast 
Swift lightning, thunder, and deadly thunderbolt; 
And her heart leapt, and gladdened was her soul. 
She donned the stormy Aegis flashing far, 
Adamantine, massy, a marvel to the Gods, 
Whereon was wrought Medusa's ghastly head, 
Fearful: strong serpents breathing forth the blast 
Of ravening fire were on the face thereof. 
Crashed on the Queen's breast all the Aegis-links, 
As after lightning crashes the firmament. 
Then grasped she her father's weapons, which no God 
Save Zeus can lift, and wide Olympus shook. 
Then swept she clouds and mist together on high; 
Night over earth was poured, haze o'er the sea. 
Zeus watched, and was right glad as broad heaven's floor

Rocked 'neath the Goddess's feet, and crashed the sky, 
As though invincible Zeus rushed forth to war. 
Then sped she Iris unto Acolus, 
From heaven far-flying over misty seas, 
To bid him send forth all his buffering winds 
O'er iron-bound Caphereus' cliffs to sweep 
Ceaselessly, and with ruin of madding blasts 
To upheave the sea. And Iris heard, and swift 
She darted, through cloud-billows plunging down -- 
Thou hadst said: "Lo, in the sky dark water and fire!" 
And to Aeolia came she, isle of caves, 
Of echoing dungeons of mad-raging winds 
With rugged ribs of mountain overarched, 
Whereby the mansion stands of Aeolus 
Hippotas' son. Him found she therewithin 
With wife and twelve sons; and she told to him 
Athena's purpose toward the homeward-bound 
Achaeans. He denied her not, but passed 
Forth of his halls, and in resistless hands 
Upswung his trident, smiting the mountain-side 
Within whose chasm-cell the wild winds dwelt 
Tempestuously shrieking. Ever pealed 
Weird roarings of their voices round its vaults. 
Cleft by his might was the hill-side; forth they poured.

He bade them on their wings bear blackest storm 
To upheave the sea, and shroud Caphereus' heights. 
Swiftly upsprang they, ere their king's command 
Was fully spoken. Mightily moaned the sea 
As they rushed o'er it; waves like mountain-cliffs 
From all sides were uprolled. The Achaeans' hearts 
Were terror-palsied, as the uptowering surge 
Now swung the ships up high through palling mist, 
Now hurled them rolled as down a precipice 
To dark abysses. Up through yawning deeps 
Some power resistless belched the boiling sand 
From the sea's floor. Tossed in despair, fear-dazed, 
Men could not grasp the oar, nor reef the sail 
About the yard-arm, howsoever fain, 
Ere the winds rent it, could not with the sheets 
Trim the torn canvas, buffeted so were they 
By ruining blasts. The helmsman had no power 
To guide the rudder with his practised hands, 
For those ill winds hurled all confusedly. 
No hope of life was left them: blackest night, 
Fury of tempest, wrath of deathless Gods, 
Raged round them. Still Poseidon heaved and swung 
The merciless sea, to work the heart's desire 
Of his brother's glorious child; and she on high 
Stormed with her lightnings, ruthless in her rage. 
Thundered from heaven Zeus, in purpose fixed 
To glorify his daughter. All the isles 
And mainlands round were lashed by leaping seas 
Nigh to Euboea, where the Power divine 
Scourged most with unrelenting stroke on stroke 
The Argives. Groan and shriek of perishing men 
Rang through the ships; started great beams and snapped 
With ominous sound, for ever ship on ship 
With shivering timbers crashed. With hopeless toil 
Men strained with oars to thrust back hulls that reeled 
Down on their own, but with the shattered planks 
Were hurled into the abyss, to perish there 
By pitiless doom; for beams of foundering ships 
From this, from that side battered out their lives, 
And crushed were all their bodies wretchedly. 
Some in the ships fell down, and like dead men 
Lay there; some, in the grip of destiny, 
Clinging to oars smooth-shaven, tried to swim; 
Some upon planks were tossing. Roared the surge 
From fathomless depths: it seemed as though sea, sky, 
And land were blended all confusedly. 

Still from Olympus thundering Atrytone 
Wielded her Father's power unshamed, and still 
The welkin shrieked around. Her ruin of wrath 
Now upon Aias hurled she: on his ship 
Dashed she a thunderbolt, and shivered it 
Wide in a moment into fragments small, 
While earth and air yelled o'er the wreck, and whirled 
And plunged and fell the whole sea down thereon. 
They in the ship were all together flung 
Forth: all about them swept the giant waves, 
Round them leapt lightnings flaming through the dark. 
Choked with the strangling surf of hissing brine, 
Gasping out life, they drifted o'er the sea. 

But even in death those captive maids rejoiced, 
As some ill-starred ones, clasping to their breasts 
Their babes, sank in the sea; some flung their arms 
Round Danaans' horror-stricken heads, and dragged 
These down with them, so rendering to their foes 
Requital for foul outrage down to them. 
And from on high the haughty Trito-born 
Looked down on all this, and her heart was glad. 

But Aias floated now on a galley's plank, 
Now through the brine with strong hands oared his path, 
Like some old Titan in his tireless might. 
Cleft was the salt sea-surge by the sinewy hands 
Of that undaunted man: the Gods beheld 
And marvelled at his courage and his strength. 
But now the billows swung him up on high 
Through misty air, as though to a mountain's peak, 
Now whelmed him down, as they would bury him 
In ravening whirlpits: yet his stubborn hands 
Toiled on unwearied. Aye to right and left 
Flashed lightnings down, and quenched them in the sea; 
For not yet was the Child of Thunderer Zeus 
Purposed to smite him dead, despite her wrath, 
Ere he had drained the cup of travail and pain 
Down to the dregs; so in the deep long time 
Affliction wore him down, tormented sore 
On every side. Grim Fates stood round the man 
Unnumbered; yet despair still kindled strength. 
He cried: "Though all the Olympians banded come 
In wrath, and rouse against me all the sea, 
I will escape them!" But no whit did he 
Elude the Gods' wrath; for the Shaker of Earth 
In fierceness of his indignation marked 
Where his hands clung to the Gyraean Rock, 
And in stern anger with an earthquake shook 
Both sea and land. Around on all sides crashed 
Caphereus' cliffs: beneath the Sea-king's wrath 
The surf-tormented beaches shrieked and roared. 
The broad crag rifted reeled into the sea, 
The rock whereto his desperate hands had clung; 
Yet did he writhe up round its jutting spurs, 
While flayed his hands were, and from 'neath his nails 
The blood ran. Wrestling with him roared the waves, 
And the foam whitened all his hair and beard. 

Yet had he 'scaped perchance his evil doom, 
Had not Poseidon, wroth with his hardihood, 
Cleaving the earth, hurled down the chasm the rock, 
As in the old time Pallas heaved on high 
Sicily, and on huge Enceladus 
Dashed down the isle, which burns with the burning yet 
Of that immortal giant, as he breathes 
Fire underground; so did the mountain-crag, 
Hurled from on high, bury the Locrian king, 
Pinning the strong man down, a wretch crushed flat. 
And so on him death's black destruction came 
Whom land and sea alike were leagued to slay. 

Still over the great deep were swept the rest 
Of those Achaeans, crouching terror-dazed 
Down in the ships, save those that mid the waves 
Had fallen. Misery encompassed all; 
For some with heavily-plunging prows drave on, 
With keels upturned some drifted. Here were masts 
Snapped from the hull by rushing gusts, and there 
Were tempest-rifted wrecks of scattered beams; 
And some had sunk, whelmed in the mighty deep, 
Swamped by the torrent downpour from the clouds: 
For these endured not madness of wind-tossed sea 
Leagued with heaven's waterspout; for streamed the sky 
Ceaselessly like a river, while the deep 
Raved round them. And one cried: "Such floods on men 
Fell only when Deucalion's deluge came, 
When earth was drowned, and all was fathomless sea!" 

So cried a Danaan, seeing soul-appalled 
That wild storm. Thousands perished; corpses thronged 
The great sea-highways: all the beaches were 
Too strait for them: the surf belched multitudes 
Forth on the land. The heavy-booming sea 
With weltering beams of ships was wholly paved, 
And here and there the grey waves gleamed between. 

So found they each his several evil fate, 
Some whelmed beneath broad-rushing billows, some 
Wretchedly perishing with their shattered ships 
By Nauplius' devising on the rocks. 
Wroth for that son whom they had done to death, 
He; when the storm rose and the Argives died, 
Rejoiced amid his sorrow, seeing a God 
Gave to his hands revenge, which now he wreaked 
Upon the host he hated, as o'er the deep 
They tossed sore-harassed. To his sea-god sire 
He prayed that all might perish, ships and men 
Whelmed in the deep. Poseidon heard his prayer, 
And on the dark surge swept them nigh his land. 
He, like a harbour-warder, lifted high 
A blazing torch, and so by guile he trapped 
The Achaean men, who deemed that they had won 
A sheltering haven: but sharp reefs and crags 
Gave awful welcome unto ships and men, 
Who, dashed to pieces on the cruel rocks 
In the black night, crowned ills with direr ills. 
Some few escaped, by a God or Power unseen 
Plucked from death's hand. Athena now rejoiced 
Her heart within, and now was racked with fears 
For prudent-souled Odysseus; for his weird 
Was through Poseidon's wrath to suffer woes 
Full many. 

But Earth-shaker's jealousy now 
Burned against those long walls and towers uppiled 
By the strong Argives for a fence against 
The Trojans' battle-onset. Swiftly then 
He swelled to overbrimming all the sea 
That rolls from Euxine down to Hellespont, 
And hurled it on the shore of Troy: and Zeus, 
For a grace unto the glorious Shaker of Earth, 
Poured rain from heaven: withal Far-darter bare 
In that great work his part; from Ida's heights 
Into one channel led he all her streams, 
And flooded the Achaeans' work. The sea 
Dashed o'er it, and the roaring torrents still 
Rushed on it, swollen by the rains of Zeus; 
And the dark surge of the wide-moaning sea 
Still hurled them back from mingling with the deep, 
Till all the Danaan walls were blotted out 
Beneath their desolating flood. Then earth 
Was by Poseidon chasm-cleft: up rushed 
Deluge of water, slime and sand, while quaked 
Sigeum with the mighty shock, and roared 
The beach and the foundations of the land 
Dardanian. So vanished, whelmed from sight, 
That mighty rampart. Earth asunder yawned, 
And all sank down, and only sand was seen, 
When back the sea rolled, o'er the beach outspread 
Far down the heavy-booming shore. All this 
The Immortals' anger wrought. But in their ships 
The Argives storm-dispersed went sailing on. 
So came they home, as heaven guided each, 
Even all that 'scaped the fell sea-tempest blasts. 

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.
