
<BASE HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plutarch/marcellu.1b.txt"><table border=1 width=100%><tr><td><table border=1 bgcolor=#ffffff cellpadding=10 cellspacing=0 width=100% color=#ffffff><tr><td><font face=arial,sans-serif color=black size=-1>This is <b><font color=#0039b6>G</font><font color=#c41200>o</font><font color=#f3c518>o</font><font color=#0039b6>g</font><font color=#30a72f>l</font><font color=#c41200>e</font></b>'s <a href="http://www.google.com/intl/en_extra/help/features.html#cached">cache</a> of <A HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plutarch/marcellu.1b.txt"><font color=blue>classics.mit.edu/Plutarch/marcellu.1b.txt</font></a>.<br>
<b><font color=#0039b6>G</font><font color=#c41200>o</font><font color=#f3c518>o</font><font color=#0039b6>g</font><font color=#30a72f>l</font><font color=#c41200>e</font></b>'s cache is the snapshot that we took of the page as we crawled the web.<br>
The page may have changed since that time.  Click here for the <A HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plutarch/marcellu.1b.txt"><font color=blue>current page</font></a> without highlighting.</font><br><br><center><font size=-2 color=black><i>Google is not affiliated with the authors of this page nor responsible for its content.</i></font></center></td></tr></table></td></tr></table><hr>
<html><body><pre>
Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Plutarch/marcellu.html

Marcellus
By Plutarch

(legendary, died 208 B.C.E.)


Translated by John Dryden

They say that Marcus Claudius, who was five times consul of the Romans,
was the son of Marcus; and that he was the first of his family called
Marcellus; that is, martial, as Posidonius affirms. He was, indeed,
by long experience, skilful in the art of war, of a strong body, valiant
of hand, and by natural inclinations addicted to war. This high temper
and heat he showed conspicuously in battle; in other respects he was
modest and obliging, and so far studious of Greek learning and discipline,
as to honour and admire those that excelled in it, though he did not
himself attain a proficiency in them equal to his desire, by reason
of his employments. For if ever there were any men whom, as Homer
says, Heaven 

"From their first youth unto their utmost age 
Appointed the laborious wars to wage," certainly they were the chief
Romans of that time; who in their youth had war with the Carthaginians
in Sicily, in their middle age with the Gauls in the defence of Italy
itself; and at last, when now grown old, struggled again with Hannibal
and the Carthaginians, and wanted in their latest years what is granted
to most men, exemption from military toils; their rank and their great
qualities still making them be called upon to undertake the command.

Marcellus, ignorant or unskillful of no kind of fighting, in single
combat surpassed himself; he never declined a challenge, and never
accepted without killing his challenger. In Sicily, he protected and
saved his brother Otacilius when surrounded in battle, and slew the
enemies that pressed upon him; for which act he was by the generals,
while he was yet but young, presented with crowns and other honourable
rewards; and, his good qualities more and more displaying themselves,
he was created Curule Aedile by the people and by the high priests
Augur; which is that priesthood to which chiefly the law assigns the
observation of auguries. In his Aedileship, a certain mischance brought
him to the necessity of bringing an impeachment into the senate. He
had a son named Marcus, of great beauty, in the flower of his age,
and no less admired for the goodness of his character. This youth,
Capitolinus, a bold and ill-mannered man, Marcellus's colleague, sought
to abuse. The boy at first himself repelled him; but when the other
again persecuted him, told his father. Marcellus, highly indignant,
accused the man in the senate: where he, having appealed to the tribunes
of the people, endeavoured by various shifts and exceptions to elude
the impeachment; and, when the tribunes refused their protection,
by flat denial rejected the charge. As there was no witness of the
fact, the senate thought fit to call the youth himself before them:
on witnessing whose blushes and tears, and shame mixed with the highest
indignation, seeking no further evidence of the crime, they condemned
Capitolinus, and set a fine upon him; of the money of which Marcellus
caused silver vessels for libation to be made, which he dedicated
to the gods. 

After the end of the first Punic war, which lasted one-and-twenty
years, the seed of Gallic tumults sprang up, and began again to trouble
Rome. The Insubrians, a people inhabiting the subalpine region of
Italy, strong in their own forces, raised from among the other Gauls
aids of mercenary soldiers, called Gaesatae. And it was a sort of
miracle, and special good fortune for Rome, that the Gallic war was
not coincident with the Punic, but that the Gauls had with fidelity
stood quiet as spectators, while the Punic war continued, as though
they had been under engagement to await and attack the victors, and
now only were at liberty to come forward. Still the position itself,
and the ancient renown of the Gauls, struck no little fear into the
minds of the Romans, who were about to undertake a war so near home
and upon their own borders; and regarded the Gauls, because they had
once taken their city, with more apprehension than any people, as
is apparent from the enactment which from that time forth provided,
that the high priests should enjoy an exemption from all military
duty, except only in Gallic insurrections. 

The great preparations, also, made by the Romans for war (for it is
not reported that the people of Rome ever had at one time so many
legions in arms, either before or since), and their extraordinary
sacrifices, were plain arguments of their fear. For though they were
most averse to barbarous and cruel rites, and entertained more than
any nation the same pious and reverent sentiments of the gods with
the Greeks; yet, when this war was coming upon them, they then, from
some prophecies in the Sibyls' books, put alive underground a pair
of Greeks, one male, the other female; and likewise two Gauls, one
of each sex, in the market called the beast market: continuing even
to this day to offer to these Greeks and Gauls certain ceremonial
observances in the month of November. 

In the beginning of this war, in which the Romans sometimes obtained
remarkable victories, sometimes were shamefully beaten, nothing was
done toward the determination of the contest until Flaminius and Furius,
being consuls, led large forces against the Insubrians. At the time
of their departure, the river that runs through the country of Picenum
was seen flowing with blood; there was a report that three moons had
once been seen at Ariminum; and, in the consular assembly, the augurs
declared that the consuls had been unduly and inauspiciously created.
The senate, therefore, immediately sent letters to the camp, recalling
the consuls to Rome with all possible speed, and commanding them to
forbear from acting against the enemies, and to abdicate the consulship
on the first opportunity. These letters being brought to Flaminius,
he deferred to open them till, having defeated and put to flight the
enemy's forces, he wasted and ravaged their borders. The people, therefore,
did not go forth to meet him when he returned with huge spoils; nay,
because he had not instantly obeyed the command in the letters, by
which he was recalled, but slighted and contemned them, they were
very near denying him the honour of a triumph. Nor was the triumph
sooner passed than they deposed him, with his colleague, from the
magistracy, and reduced them to the state of private citizens. So
much were all things at Rome made to depend upon religion; they would
not allow any contempt of the omens and the ancient rites, even though
attended with the highest success: thinking it to be of more importance
to the public safety that the magistrates should reverence the gods,
than that they should overcome their enemies. Thus Tiberius Sempronius,
whom for his probity and virtue the citizens highly esteemed, created
Scipio Nasica and Caius Marcius consuls to succeed him; and when they
were gone into their provinces, lit upon books concerning the religious
observances, where he found something he had not known before; which
was this. When the consul took his auspices, he sat without the city
in a house, or tent, hired for that occasion; but, if it happened
that he, for any urgent cause, returned into the city, without having
yet seen any certain signs, he was obliged to leave that first building,
or tent, and to seek another to repeat the survey from. Tiberius,
it appears, in ignorance of this, had twice used the same building
before announcing the new consuls. Now, understanding his error, he
referred the matter to the senate: nor did the senate neglect this
minute fault, but soon wrote expressly of it to Scipio Nasica and
Caius Marcius; who, leaving their provinces and without delay returning
to Rome, laid down their magistracy. This happened at a later period.
About the same time, too, the priesthood was taken away from two men
of very great honour, Cornelius Cethegus and Quintus Sulpicius: from
the former, because he had not rightly held out the entrails of a
beast slain for sacrifice; from the latter, because, while he was
immolating, the tufted cap which the Flamens wear had fallen from
his head. Minucius, the dictator, who had already named Caius Flaminius
master of the horse, they deposed from his command, because the squeak
of a mouse was heard, and put others into their places. And yet, notwithstanding,
by observing so anxiously these little niceties they did not run into
any superstition, because they never varied from nor exceeded the
observances of their ancestors. 

So soon as Flaminius with his colleague had resigned the consulate,
Marcellus was declared consul by the presiding officers called Interrexes;
and, entering into the magistracy, chose Cnaeus Cornelius his colleague.
There was a report that, the Gauls proposing a pacification, and the
senate also inclining to peace, Marcellus inflamed the people to war;
but a peace appears to have been agreed upon, which the Gaesatae broke;
who, passing the Alps, stirred up the Insubrians (they being thirty
thousand in number, and the Insubrians more numerous by far); and
proud of their strength, marched directly to Acerrae, a city seated
on the north of the river Po. From thence Britomartus, king of the
Gaesatae, taking with him ten thousand soldiers, harassed the country
round about. News of which being brought to Marcellus, leaving his
colleague at Acerrae with the foot and all the heavy arms and a third
part of the horse, and carrying with him the rest of the horse and
six hundred light-armed foot, marching night and day without remission,
he stayed not till he came up to these ten thousand near a Gaulish
village called Clastidium, which not long before had been reduced
under the Roman jurisdiction. Nor had he time to refresh his soldiers
or to give them rest. For the barbarians, that were then present,
immediately observed his approach, and contemned him, because he had
very few foot with him. The Gauls were singularly skilful in horsemanship,
and thought to excel in it; and as at present they also exceeded Marcellus
in number, they made no account of him. They, therefore, with their
king at their head, instantly charged upon him, as if they would trample
him under their horses' feet, threatening all kinds of cruelties.
Marcellus, because his men were few, that they might not be encompassed
and charged on all sides by the enemy, extended his wings of horse,
and, riding about, drew out his wings of foot in length, till he came
near to the enemy. Just as he was in the act of turning round to face
the enemy, it so happened that his horse, startled with their fierce
look and their cries, gave back, and carried him forcibly aside. Fearing
lest this accident, if converted into an omen, might discourage his
soldiers, he quickly brought his horse round to confront the enemy,
and made a gesture of adoration to the sun, as if he had wheeled about
not by chance, but for a purpose of devotion. For it was customary
to the Romans, when they offered worship to the gods, to turn round;
and in this moment of meeting the enemy, he is said to have vowed
the best of the arms to Jupiter Feretrius. 

The king of the Gauls beholding Marcellus, and from the badges of
his authority conjecturing him to be the general, advanced some way
before his embattled army, and with a loud voice challenged him, and,
brandishing his lance, fiercely ran in full career at him; exceeding
the rest of the Gauls in stature, and with his armour, that was adorned
with gold and silver and various colours, shining like lightning.
These arms seeming to Marcellus, while he viewed the enemy's army
drawn up in battalia, to be the best and fairest, and thinking them
to be those he had vowed to Jupiter, he instantly ran upon the king,
and pierced through his breastplate with his lance; then pressing
upon him with the weight of his horse, threw him to the ground, and
with two or three strokes more slew him. Immediately he leapt from
his horse, laid his hand upon the dead king's arm and, looking up
towards Heaven, thus spoke: "O Jupiter Feretrius, arbiter of the exploits
of captains, and of the acts of commanders in war and battles, be
thou witness that I, a general, have slain a general: I, a consul,
have slain a king with my own hand, third of all the Romans; and that
to thee I consecrate these first and most excellent of the spoils.
Grant to us to despatch the relics of the war with the same course
of fortune." Then the Roman horse joining battle not only with the
enemy's horse, but also with the foot who attacked them, obtained
a singular and unheard-of victory. For never before or since have
so few horse defeated such numerous forces of horse and foot together.
The enemies being to a great number slain, and the spoils collected,
he returned to his colleague, who was conducting the war, with ill-success,
against the enemies near the greatest and most populous of the Gallic
cities, Milan. This was their capital, and, therefore, fighting valiantly
in defence of it, they were not so much besieged by Cornelius, as
they besieged him. But Marcellus having returned, and the Gaesatae
retiring as soon as they were certified of the death of the king and
the defeat of his army, Milan was taken. The rest of their towns,
and all they had, the Gauls delivered up of their own accord to the
Romans, and had peace upon equitable conditions granted to them.

Marcellus alone, by a decree of the senate, triumphed. The triumph
was in magnificence, opulence, spoils, and the gigantic bodies of
the captives most remarkable. But the most grateful and most rare
spectacle of all was the general himself, carrying the arms of the
barbarian king to the god to whom he had vowed them. He had taken
a tall and straight stock of an oak, and had lopped and formed it
to a trophy. Upon this he fastened and hung about the arms of the
king, arranging all the pieces in their suitable places. The procession
advancing solemnly, he, carrying this trophy, ascended the chariot;
and thus, himself the fairest and most glorious triumphant image,
was conveyed into the city. The army adorned with shining armour followed
in order, and with verses composed for the occasion, and with songs
of victory celebrated the praises of Jupiter and of their general.
Then entering the temple of Jupiter Feretrius, he dedicated his gift;
the third, and to our memory the last, that ever did so. The first
was Romulus, after having slain Acron, king of the Caeninenses: the
second, Cornelius Cossus, who slew Tolumnius the Etruscan: after them
Marcellus, having killed Britomartus, king of the Gauls; after Marcellus,
no man. The god to whom these spoils were consecrated is called Jupiter
Feretrius, from the trophy carried on the feretrum, one of the Greek
words which at that time still existed in great numbers in Latin:
or, as others say, it is the surname of the Thundering Jupiter derived
from ferire, to strike. Others there are who would have the name to
be deduced from the strokes that are given in fight; since even now
in battles, when they press upon their enemies, they constantly call
out to each other, strike, in Latin feri. Spoils in general they call
Spolia, and these in particular Opima; though, indeed, they say that
Numa Pompilius, in his commentaries, makes mention of first, second,
and third Spolia Opima; and that he prescribes that the first taken
be consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, the second to Mars, the third
to Quirinus; as also that the reward of the first be three hundred
asses; of the second, two hundred; of the third, one hundred. The
general account, however, prevails, that those spoils only are Opima
which the general first takes in set battle, and takes from the enemy's
chief captain whom he has slain with his own hand. But of this enough.
The victory and the ending of the war was so welcome to the people
of Rome, that they sent to Apollo of Delphi, in testimony of their
gratitude, a present of a golden cup of an hundred pound weight, and
gave a great part of the spoil to their associate cities, and took
care that many presents should be sent also to Hiero, King of the
Syracusans, their friend and ally. 

When Hannibal invaded Italy, Marcellus was despatched with a fleet
to Sicily. And when the army had been defeated at Cannae, and many
thousands of them perished, and a few had saved themselves by flying
to Canusium, and all feared lest Hannibal, who had destroyed the strength
of the Roman army, should advance at once with his victorious troops
to Rome, Marcellus first sent for the protection of the city fifteen
hundred soldiers from the fleet. Then, by decree of the senate, going
to Canusium, having heard that many of the soldiers had come together
in that place, he led them out of the fortifications to prevent the
enemy from ravaging the country. The chief Roman commanders had most
of them fallen in battles; and the citizens complained that the extreme
caution of Fabius Maximus, whose integrity and wisdom gave him the
highest authority, verged upon timidity and inaction. They confided
in him to keep them out of danger, but could not expect that he would
enable them to retaliate. Fixing, therefore, their thoughts upon Marcellus,
and hoping to combine his boldness, confidence, and promptitude with
Fabius's caution and prudence, and to temper the one by the other,
they sent, sometimes both with consular command, sometimes one as
consul, the other as proconsul, against the enemy. Posidonius writes,
that Fabius was called the buckler, Marcellus the sword of Rome. Certainly,
Hannibal himself confessed that he feared Fabius as a schoolmaster,
Marcellus as an adversary: the former, lest he should be hindered
from doing mischief; the latter, lest he should receive harm himself.

And first, when among Hannibal's soldiers, proud of their victory,
carelessness and boldness had grown to a great height, Marcellus,
attacking all their stragglers and plundering parties, cut them off,
and by little and little diminished their forces. Then carrying aid
to the Neopolitans and Nolans, he confirmed the minds of the former,
who, indeed, were of their own accord faithful enough to the Romans;
but in Nola he found a state of discord, the senate not being able
to rule and keep in the common people, who were generally favourers
of Hannibal. There was in the town one Bantius, a man renowned for
his high birth and courage. This man, after he had fought most fiercely
at Cannae, and had killed many of the enemies, at last was found lying
in a heap of dead bodies, covered with darts, and was brought to Hannibal,
who so honoured him, that he not only dismissed him without ransom,
but also contracted friendship with him, and made him his guest. In
gratitude for this great favour, he became one of the strongest partisans
of Hannibal, and urged the people to revolt. Marcellus could not be
induced to put to death a man of such eminence, and who had endured
such dangers in fighting on the Roman side; but, knowing himself able,
by the general kindliness of his disposition, and in particular by
the attractiveness of his address, to gain over a character whose
passion was for honour, one day when Bantius saluted him, he asked
him who he was; not that he knew him not before, but seeking an occasion
of further conference. When Bantius had told who he was, Marcellus,
seeming surprised with joy and wonder, replied: "Are you that Bantius
whom the Romans commend above the rest that fought at Cannae, and
praise as the one man that not only did not forsake the consul Paulus
Aemilius, but received in his own body many darts thrown at him?"
Bantius owning himself to be that very man, and showing his scars:
"Why, then," said Marcellus, "did not you, having such proofs to show
of your affection to us, come to me at my first arrival here? Do you
think that we are unwilling to requite with favour those who have
well deserved, and who are honoured even by our enemies?" He followed
up his courtesies by a present of a war-horse and five hundred drachmas
in money. From that time Bantius became the most faithful assistant
and ally of Marcellus, and a most keen discoverer of those that attempted
innovation and sedition. 

These were many, and had entered into a conspiracy to plunder the
baggage of the Romans, when they should make an irruption against
the enemy. Marcellus, therefore, having marshalled his army within
the city, placed the baggage near to the gates, and, by an edict,
forbade the Nolans to go to the walls. Thus, outside the city, no
arms could be seen; by which prudent device he allured Hannibal to
move with his army in some disorder to the city, thinking that things
were in a tumult there. Then Marcellus, the nearest gate being, as
he had commanded, thrown open, issuing forth with the flower of his
horse in front, charged the enemy. By and by the foot, sallying out
of another gate, with a loud shout joined in the battle. And while
Hannibal opposes part of his forces to these, the third gate also
is opened, out of which the rest break forth, and on all quarters
fall upon the enemies, who were dismayed at this unexpected encounter,
and did but feebly resist those with whom they had been first engaged,
because of their attack by these others who sallied out later. Here
Hannibal's soldiers, with much bloodshed and many wounds, were beaten
back to their camp, and for the first time turned their backs to the
Romans. There fell in this action, as it is related, more than five
thousand of them; of the Romans, not above five hundred. Livy does
not affirm that either the victory or the slaughter of the enemy was
so great; but certain it is that the adventure brought great glory
to Marcellus, and to the Romans, after their calamities, a great revival
of confidence, as they began now to entertain a hope that the enemy
with whom they contended was not invincible, but liable like themselves
to defeats. 

Therefore, the other consul being deceased, the people recalled Marcellus,
that they might put him into his place; and, in spite of the magistrates,
succeeded in postponing the election till his arrival, when he was
by all the suffrages created consul. But because it happened to thunder,
the augurs accounting that he was not legitimately created, and yet
not daring, for fear of the people, to declare their sentence openly,
Marcellus voluntarily resigned the consulate, retaining however his
command. Being created proconsul, and returning to the camp at Nola,
he proceeded to harass those that followed the party of the Carthaginians;
on whose coming with speed to succour them, Marcellus declined a challenge
to a set battle, but when Hannibal had sent out a party to plunder,
and now expected no fight, he broke out upon him with his army. He
had distributed to the foot long lances, such as are commonly used
in naval fights; and instructed them to throw them with great force
at convenient distances against the enemies, who were inexperienced
in that way of darting, and used to fight with short darts hand to
hand. This seems to have been the cause of the total rout and open
flight of all the Carthaginians who were then engaged; there fell
of them five thousand; four elephants were killed, and two taken;
but what was of the greatest moment, on the third day after, more
than three hundred horse, Spaniards and Numidians mixed, deserted
to him, a disaster that had never to that day happened to Hannibal,
who had kept together in harmony an army of barbarians, collected
out of many various and discordant nations. Marcellus and his successors
in all this war made good use of the faithful service of these horsemen.

He now was a third time created consul, and sailed over into Sicily.
For the success of Hannibal had excited the Carthaginians to lay claim
to that whole island; chiefly because, after the murder of the tyrant
Hieronymus, all things had been in tumult and confusion at Syracuse.
For which reason the Romans also had sent before to that city a force
under the conduct of Appius, as praetor. While Marcellus was receiving
that army, a number of Roman soldiers cast themselves at his feet,
upon occasion of the following calamity. Of those that survived the
battle at Cannae, some had escaped by flight, and some were taken
alive by the enemy; so great a multitude, that it was thought there
were not remaining Romans enough to defend the wall of the city. And
yet the magnanimity and constancy of the city was such, that it would
not redeem the captives from Hannibal, though it might have done so
for a small ransom; a decree of the senate forbade it, and chose rather
to leave them to be killed by the enemy, or sold out of Italy; and
commanded that all who had saved themselves by flight should be transported
into Sicily, and not permitted to return into Italy, until the war
with Hannibal should be ended. These, therefore, when Marcellus was
arrived in Sicily, addressed themselves to him in great numbers; and
casting themselves at his feet, with much lamentation and tears humbly
besought him to admit them to honourable service; and promised to
make it appear by their future fidelity and exertions that that defeat
had been received rather by misfortune than by cowardice. Marcellus,
pitying them, petitioned the senate by letters, that he might have
leave at all times to recruit his legions out of them. After much
debate about the thing, the senate decreed they were of opinion that
the commonwealth did not require the service of cowardly soldiers;
if Marcellus perhaps thought otherwise, he might make use of them,
provided no one of them be honoured on any occasion with a crown or
military gift, as a reward of his virtue or courage. This decree stung
Marcellus; and on his return to Rome, after the Sicilian war was ended,
he upbraided the senate that they had denied to him, who had so highly
deserved of the republic, liberty to relieve so great a number of
citizens in great calamity. 

At this time Marcellus, first incensed by injuries done him by Hippocrates,
commander of the Syracusans (who, to give proof of his good affection
to the Carthaginians, and to acquire the tyranny to himself, had killed
a number of Romans at Leontini), besieged and took by force the city
of Leontini; yet violated none of the townsmen; only deserters, as
many as he took, he subjected to the punishment of the rods and axe.
But Hippocrates, sending a report to Syracuse, that Marcellus had
put all the adult population to the sword, and then coming upon the
Syracusans, who had risen in tumult upon that false report, made himself
master of the city. Upon this Marcellus moved with his whole army
to Syracuse, and encamping near the wall, sent ambassadors into the
city to relate to the Syracusans the truth of what had been done in
Leontini. When these could not prevail by treaty, the whole power
being now in the hands of Hippocrates, he proceeded to attack the
city both by land and by sea. The land forces were conducted by Appius:
Marcellus, with sixty galleys, each with five rows of oars, furnished
with all sorts of arms and missiles, and a huge bridge of planks laid
upon eight ships chained together, upon which was carried the engine
to cast stones and darts, assaulted the walls, relying on the abundance
and magnificence of his preparations, and on his own previous glory;
all which, however, were, it would seem, but trifles for Archimedes
and his machines. 

These machines he had designed and contrived, not as matters of any
importance, but as mere amusements in geometry; in compliance with
King Hiero's desire and request, some little time before, that he
should reduce to practice some part of his admirable speculation in
science, and by accommodating the theoretic truth to sensation and
ordinary use, bring it more within the appreciation of the people
in general. Eudoxus and Archytas had been the first originators of
this far-famed and highly-prized art of mechanics, which they employed
as an elegant illustration of geometrical truths, and as means of
sustaining experimentally, to the satisfaction of the senses, conclusions
too intricate for proof by words and diagrams. As, for example, to
solve the problem, so often required in constructing geometrical figures,
given the two extremes, to find the two mean lines of a proportion,
both these mathematicians had recourse to the aid of instruments,
adapting to their purpose certain curves and sections of lines. But
what with Plato's indignation at it, and his invectives against it
as the mere corruption and annihilation of the one good of geometry,
which was thus shamefully turning its back upon the unembodied objects
of pure intelligence to recur to sensation, and to ask help (not to
be obtained without base supervisions and depravation) from matter;
so it was that mechanics came to be separated from geometry, and,
repudiated and neglected by philosophers, took its place as a military
art. Archimedes, however, in writing to King Hiero, whose friend and
near relation he was, had stated that given the force, any given weight
might be moved, and even boasted, we are told, relying on the strength
of demonstration, that if there were another earth, by going into
it he could remove this. Hiero being struck with amazement at this,
and entreating him to make good this problem by actual experiment,
and show some great weight moved by a small engine, he fixed accordingly
upon a ship of burden out of the king's arsenal, which could not be
drawn out of the dock without great labour and many men; and, loading
her with many passengers and a full freight, sitting himself the while
far off, with no great endeavour, but only holding the head of the
pulley in his hand and drawing the cords by degrees, he drew the ship
in a straight line, as smoothly and evenly as if she had been in the
sea. The king, astonished at this, and convinced of the power of the
art, prevailed upon Archimedes to make him engines accommodated to
all the purposes, offensive and defensive, of a siege. These the king
himself never made use of, because he spent almost all his life in
a profound quiet and the highest affluence. But the apparatus was,
in most opportune time, ready at hand for the Syracusans, and with
it also the engineer himself. 

When, therefore, the Romans assaulted the walls in two places at once,
fear and consternation stupefied the Syracusans, believing that nothing
was able to resist that violence and those forces. But when Archimedes
began to ply his engines, he at once shot against the land forces
all sorts of missile weapons, and immense masses of stone that came
down with incredible noise and violence; against which no man could
stand; for they knocked down those upon whom they fell in heaps, breaking
all their ranks and files. In the meantime huge poles thrust out from
the walls over the ships sunk some by the great weights which they
let down from on high upon them; others they lifted up into the air
by an iron hand or beak like a crane's beak and, when they had drawn
them up by the prow, and set them on end upon the poop, they plunged
them to the bottom of the sea; or else the ships, drawn by engines
within, and whirled about, were dashed against steep rocks that stood
jutting out under the walls, with great destruction of the soldiers
that were aboard them. A ship was frequently lifted up to a great
height in the air (a dreadful thing to behold), and was rolled to
and fro, and kept swinging, until the mariners were all thrown out,
when at length it was dashed against the rocks, or let fall. At the
engine that Marcellus brought upon the bridge of ships, which was
called Sambuca, from some resemblance it had to an instrument of music,
while it was as yet approaching the wall, there was discharged a piece
of rock of ten talents weight, then a second and a third, which, striking
upon it with immense force and a noise like thunder, broke all its
foundation to pieces, shook out all its fastenings, and completely
dislodged it from the bridge. So Marcellus, doubtful what counsel
to pursue, drew off his ships to a safer distance, and sounded a retreat
to his forces on land. They then took a resolution of coming up under
the walls, if it were possible, in the night; thinking that as Archimedes
used ropes stretched at length in playing his engines, the soldiers
would now be under the shot, and the darts would, for want of sufficient
distance to throw them, fly over their heads without effect. But he,
it appeared, had long before framed for such occasions engines accommodated
to any distance, and shorter weapons; and had made numerous small
openings in the walls, through which, with engines of a shorter range,
unexpected blows were inflicted on the assailants. Thus, when they
who thought to deceive the defenders came close up to the walls, instantly
a shower of darts and other missile weapons was again cast upon them.
And when stones came tumbling down perpendicularly upon their heads,
and, as it were, the whole wall shot out arrows at them, they retired.
And now, again, as they were going off, arrows and darts of a longer
range inflicted a great slaughter among them, and their ships were
driven one against another; while they themselves were not able to
retaliate in any way. For Archimedes had provided and fixed most of
his engines immediately under the wall; whence the Romans, seeing
that indefinite mischief overwhelmed them from no visible means, began
to think they were fighting with the gods. 

Yet Marcellus escaped unhurt, and deriding his own artificers and
engineers, "What," said he, "must we give up fighting with this geometrical
Briareus, who plays pitch-and-toss with our ships, and, with the multitude
of darts which he showers at a single moment upon us, really outdoes
the hundred-handed giants of mythology?" And, doubtless, the rest
of the Syracusans were but the body of Archimedes's designs, one soul
moving and governing all; for, laying aside all other arms, with this
alone they infested the Romans and protected themselves. In fine,
when such terror had seized upon the Romans, that, if they did but
see a little rope or a piece of wood from the wall, instantly crying
out, that there it was again, Archimedes was about to let fly some
engine at them, they turned their backs and fled, Marcellus desisted
from conflicts and assaults, putting all his hope in a long siege.
Yet Archimedes possessed so high a spirit, so profound a soul, and
such treasures of scientific knowledge, that though these inventions
had now obtained him the renown of more than human sagacity, he yet
would not deign to leave behind him any commentary or writing on such
subjects; but, repudiating as sordid and ignoble the whole trade of
engineering, and every sort of art that lends itself to mere use and
profit, he placed his whole affection and ambition in those purer
speculations where there can be no reference to the vulgar needs of
life; studies, the superiority of which to all others is unquestioned,
and in which the only doubt can be whether the beauty and grandeur
of the subjects examined, of the precision and cogency of the methods
and means of proof, most deserve our admiration. It is not possible
to find in all geometry more difficult and intricate questions, or
more simple and lucid explanations. Some ascribe this to his natural
genius; while others think that incredible effort and toil produced
these, to all appearances, easy and unlaboured results. No amount
of investigation of yours would succeed in attaining the proof, and
yet, once seen, you immediately believe you would have discovered
it; by so smooth and so rapid a path he leads you to the conclusion
required. And thus it ceases to be incredible that (as is commonly
told of him) the charm of his familiar and domestic Siren made him
forget his food and neglect his person, to that degree that when he
was occasionally carried by absolute violence to bathe or have his
body anointed, he used to trace geometrical figures in the ashes of
the fire, and diagrams in the oil on his body, being in a state of
entire preoccupation, and, in the truest sense, divine possession
with his love and delight in science. His discoveries were numerous
and admirable; but he is said to have requested his friends and relations
that, when he was dead, they would place over his tomb a sphere containing
a cylinder, inscribing it with the ratio which the containing solid
bears to the contained. 

Such was Archimedes, who now showed himself, and so far as lay in
him the city also, invincible. While the siege continued, Marcellus
took Megara, one of the earliest founded of the Greek cities in Sicily,
and capturing also the camp of Hippocrates at Acilae, killed above
eight thousand men, having attacked them whilst they were engaged
in forming their fortifications. He overran a great part of Sicily;
gained over many towns from the Carthaginians, and overcame all that
dared to encounter him. As the siege went on, one Damippus, a Lacedaemonian,
putting to sea in a ship from Syracuse, was taken. When the Syracusans
much desired to redeem this man, and there were many meetings and
treaties about the matter betwixt them and Marcellus, he had opportunity
to notice a tower into which a body of men might be secretly introduced,
as the wall near to it was not difficult to surmount, and it was itself
carelessly guarded. Coming often thither, and entertaining conferences
about the release of Damippus, he had pretty well calculated the height
of the tower, and got ladders prepared. The Syracusans celebrated
a feast to Diana; this juncture of time, when they were given up entirely
to wine and sport, Marcellus laid hold of, and before the citizens
perceived it, not only possessed himself of the tower, but, before
the break of day, filled the wall around with soldiers, and made his
way into the Hexapylum. The Syracusans now beginning to stir, and
to be alarmed at the tumult, he ordered the trumpets everywhere to
sound, and thus frightened them all into flight, as if all parts of
the city were already won, though the most fortified, and the fairest,
and most ample quarter was still ungained. It is called Acradina,
and was divided by a wall from the outer city, one part of which they
call Neapolis, the other Tycha. Possessing himself of these, Marcellus,
about break of day, entered through the Hexapylum, all his officers
congratulating him. But looking down from the higher places upon the
beautiful and spacious city below, he is said to have wept much, commiserating
the calamity that hung over it, when his thoughts represented to him
how dismal and foul the face of the city would be in a few hours,
when plundered and sacked by the soldiers. For among the officers
of his army there was not one man that durst deny the plunder of the
city to the soldiers' demands; nay, many were instant that it should
be set on fire and laid level to the ground: but this Marcellus would
not listen to. Yet he granted, but with great unwillingness and reluctance,
that the money and slaves should be made prey; giving orders, at the
same time, that none should violate any free person, nor kill, misuse,
or make a slave of any of the Syracusans. Though he had used this
moderation, he still esteemed the condition of that city to be pitiable,
and, even amidst the congratulations and joy, showed his strong feelings
of sympathy and commiseration at seeing all the riches accumulated
during a long felicity now dissipated in an hour. For it is related
that no less prey and plunder was taken here than afterward in Carthage.
For not long after they obtained also the plunder of the other parts
of the city, which were taken by treachery; leaving nothing untouched
but the king's money, which was brought into the public treasury.
But nothing afflicted Marcellus so much as the death of Archimedes,
who was then, as fate would have it, intent upon working out some
problem by a diagram, and having fixed his mind alike and his eyes
upon the subject of his speculation, he never noticed the incursion
of the Romans, nor that the city was taken. In this transport of study
and contemplation, a soldier, unexpectedly coming up to him, commanded
him to follow to Marcellus; which he declining to do before he had
worked out his problem to a demonstration, the soldier, enraged, drew
his sword and ran him through. Others write that a Roman soldier,
running upon him with a drawn sword, offered to kill him; and that
Archimedes, looking back, earnestly besought him to hold his hand
a little while, that he might not leave what he was then at work upon
inconclusive and imperfect; but the soldier, nothing moved by his
entreaty, instantly killed him. Others again relate that, as Archimedes
was carrying to Marcellus mathematical instruments, dials, spheres,
and angles, by which the magnitude of the sun might be measured to
the sight, some soldiers seeing him, and thinking that he carried
gold in a vessel, slew him. Certain it is that his death was very
afflicting to Marcellus; and that Marcellus ever after regarded him
that killed him as a murderer; and that he sought for his kindred
and honoured them with signal favours. 

Indeed, foreign nations had held the Romans to be excellent soldiers
and formidable in battle; but they had hitherto given no memorable
example of gentleness, or humanity, or civil virtue; and Marcellus
seems first to have shown to the Greeks that his countrymen were most
illustrious for their justice. For such was his moderation to all
with whom he had anything to do, and such his benignity also to many
cities and private men, that, if anything hard or severe was decreed
concerning the people of Enna, Megara, or Syracuse, the blame was
thought to belong rather to those upon whom the storm fell, than to
those who brought it upon them. One example of many I will commemorate.
In Sicily there is a town called Engyum, not indeed great, but very
ancient and ennobled by the presence of the goddesses, called the
Mothers. The temple, they say, was built by the Cretans; and they
show some spears and brazen helmets, inscribed with the names of Meriones,
and (with the same spelling as in Latin) of Ulysses, who consecrated
them to the goddesses. This city highly favouring the party of the
Carthaginians, Nicias, the most eminent of the citizens, counselled
them to go over to the Romans; to that end acting freely and openly
in harangues to their assemblies, arguing the imprudence and madness
of the opposite course. They, fearing his power and authority, resolved
to deliver him in bonds to the Carthaginians. Nicias, detecting the
design, and seeing that his person was secretly kept in watch, proceeded
to speak irreligiously to the vulgar of the Mothers, and showed many
signs of disrespect, as if he denied and contemned the received opinion
of the presence of those goddesses; his enemies the while rejoicing
that he, of his own accord, sought the destruction hanging over his
head. When they were just now about to lay hands upon him, an assembly
was held, and here Nicias, making a speech to the people concerning
some affair then under deliberation, in the midst of his address,
cast himself upon the ground; and soon after, while amazement (as
usually happens on such surprising occasions) held the assembly immovable,
raising and turning his head round, he began in a trembling and deep
tone, but by degrees raised and sharpened his voice. When he saw the
whole theatre struck with horror and silence, throwing off his mantle
and rending his tunic he leaps up half naked, and runs towards the
door, crying out aloud that he was driven by the wrath of the Mothers.
When no man durst, out of religious fear, lay hands upon him or stop
him, but all gave way before him, he ran out of the gate, not omitting
any shriek or gesture of men possessed and mad. His wife, conscious
of his counterfeiting, and privy to his design, taking her children
with her, first cast herself as a suppliant before the temple of the
goddesses; then, pretending to seek her wandering husband, no man
hindering her, went out of the town in safety; and by this means they
all escaped to Marcellus at Syracuse. After many other such affronts
offered him by the men of Engyum, Marcellus, having taken them all
prisoners and cast them into bonds, was preparing to inflict upon
them the last punishment; when Nicias, with tears in his eyes, addressed
himself to him. In fine, casting himself at Marcellus's feet, and
deprecating for his citizens, he begged most earnestly their lives,
chiefly those of his enemies. Marcellus, relenting, set them all at
liberty, and rewarded Nicias with ample lands and rich presents. This
history is recorded by Posidonius the philosopher. 

Marcellus, at length recalled by the people of Rome to the immediate
war at home, to illustrate his triumph, and adorn the city, carried
away with him a great number of the most beautiful ornaments of Syracuse.
For, before that, Rome neither had, nor had seen, any of those fine
and exquisite rarities; nor was any pleasure taken in graceful and
elegant pieces of workmanship. Stuffed with barbarous arms and spoils
stained with blood, and everywhere crowned with triumphal memorials
and trophies, she was no pleasant or delightful spectacle for the
eyes of peaceful or refined spectators; but, as Epaminondas named
the fields of Boeotia the stage of Mars; and Xenophon called Ephesus
the workhouse of war; so, in my judgment, may you call Rome, at that
time (to use the words of Pindar), "the precinct of the peaceless
Mars." Whence Marcellus was more popular with the people in general,
because he had adorned the city with beautiful objects that had all
the charms of Grecian grace and symmetry; but Fabius Maximus, who
neither touched nor brought away anything of this kind from Tarentum,
when he had taken it, was more approved of by the elder men. He carried
off the money and valuables, but forbade the statues to be moved;
adding, as it is commonly related, "Let us leave to the Tarentines
these offended gods." They blamed Marcellus, first for placing the
city in an invidious position, as it seemed now to celebrate victories
and lead processions of triumph, not only over men, but also over
the gods as captives; then, that he had diverted to idleness, and
vain talk about curious arts and artificers, the common people, which,
bred up in wars and agriculture, had never tasted of luxury and sloth,
and, as Euripides said of Hercules, had been- 

"Rude, unrefined, only for great things good," so that now they misspent
much of their time in examining and criticizing trifles. And yet,
notwithstanding this reprimand, Marcellus made it his glory to the
Greeks themselves, that he had taught his ignorant countrymen to esteem
and admire the elegant and wonderful productions of Greece.

But when the envious opposed his being brought triumphant into the
city, because there were some relics of the war in Sicily, and a third
triumph would be looked upon with jealousy, he gave way. He triumphed
upon the Alban mount, and thence entered the city in ovation, as it
is called in Latin, in Greek eua; but in this ovation he was neither
carried in a chariot, nor crowned with laurel, nor ushered by trumpets
sounding; but went afoot with shoes on, many flutes or pipes sounding
in concert, while he passed along, wearing a garland of myrtle, in
a peaceable aspect, exciting rather love and respect than fear. Whence
I am, by conjecture, led to think that, originally, the difference
observed betwixt ovation and triumph did not depend upon the greatness
of the achievements, but the manner of performing them. For they who,
having fought a set battle, and slain the enemy, returned victors,
led that martial, terrible triumph, and, as the ordinary custom then
was in lustrating the army, adorned the arms and the soldiers with
a great deal of laurel. But they who without force, by colloquy, persuasion,
and reasoning, had done the business, to these captains custom gave
the honour of the unmilitary and festive ovation. For the pipe is
the badge of peace, and myrtle the plant of Venus, who more than the
rest of the gods and goddesses abhors force and war. It is called
ovation, not as most think, from the Greek euasmus, because they act
it with shouting and cries of Eua: for so do they also the proper
triumphs. The Greeks have wrested the word to their own language,
thinking that this honour, also, must have some connection with Bacchus,
who in Greek has the titles of Euius and Thriambus. But the thing
is otherwise. For it was the custom for commanders, in their triumph,
to immolate an ox, but in their ovation, a sheep: hence they named
it Ovation, from the Latin ovis. It is worth observing, how exactly
opposite the sacrifices appointed by the Spartan legislator are to
those of the Romans. For at Lacedaemon, a captain, who had performed
the work he had undertook by cunning, or courteous treaty, on laying
down his command, immolated an ox; he that did the business by battle,
offered a cock; the Lacedaemonians, though most warlike, thinking
exploit performed by reason and wisdom to be more excellent and more
congruous to man, than one effected by mere force and courage. Which
of the two is to be preferred I leave to the determination of others.

Marcellus being the fourth time consul, his enemies suborned the Syracusans
to come to Rome to accuse him, and to complain that they had suffered
indignities and wrongs, contrary to the conditions granted them. It
happened that Marcellus was in the capitol offering sacrifice when
the Syracusans petitioned the senate, yet sitting, that they might
have leave to accuse him and present their grievances. Marcellus's
colleague, eager to protect him in his absence, put them out of the
court. But Marcellus himself came as soon as he heard of it. And first,
in his curule chair as consul, he referred to the senate the cognizance
of other matters: but when these were transacted, rising from his
seat, he passed as a private man into the place where the accused
were wont to make their defence, and gave free liberty to the Syracusans
to impeach him. But they, struck with consternation by his majesty
and confidence, stood astonished; and the power of his presence now,
in his robe of state, appeared far more terrible and severe than it
had done when he was arrayed in armour. Yet, reanimated at length
by Marcellus's rivals, they began their impeachment, and made an oration
in which pleas of justice mingled with lamentation and complaint;
the sum of which was, that being allies and friends of the people
of Rome, they had, notwithstanding, suffered things which other commanders
had abstained from inflicting upon enemies. To this Marcellus answered
that they had committed many acts of hostility against the people
of Rome, and had suffered nothing but what enemies conquered and captured
in war cannot possibly be protected from suffering: that it was their
own fault they had been made captives, because they refused to give
ear to his frequent attempts to persuade them by gentle means: neither
were they forced into war by the power of tyrants, but had rather
chosen the tyrants themselves for the express object that they might
make war. The orations ended, and the Syracusans, according to the
custom, having retired, Marcellus left his colleague to ask the sentences,
and, withdrawing with the Syracusans, stayed expecting at the doors
of the senate-house; not in the least discomposed in spirit, either
with alarm at the accusation, or by anger against the Syracusans;
but with perfect calmness and serenity attending the issue of the
cause. The sentences at length being all asked, and a decree of the
senate made in vindication of Marcellus, the Syracusans, with tears
flowing from their eyes, cast themselves at his knees, beseeching
him to forgive themselves there present, and to be moved by the misery
of the rest of their city, which would ever be mindful of, and grateful
for, his benefits. Thus Marcellus, softened by their tears and distress,
was not only reconciled to the deputies, but ever afterwards continued
to find opportunity of doing kindness to the Syracusans. The liberty
which he had restored to them, and their rights, laws, and goods that
were left, the senate confirmed. Upon which account the Syracusans,
besides other signal honours, made a law, that if Marcellus should
at any time come into Sicily, or any of his posterity, the Syracusans
should wear garlands and offer public sacrifice to the gods.

After this he moved against Hannibal. And whereas the other consuls
and commanders, since the defeat received at Cannae, had all made
use of the same policy against Hannibal, namely, to decline coming
to a battle with him; and none had had the courage to encounter him
in the field and put themselves to the decision by the sword; Marcellus
entered upon the opposite course, thinking that Italy would be destroyed
by the very delay by which they looked to wear out Hannibal; and that
Fabius, who, adhering to his cautious policy, waited to see the war
extinguished, while Rome itself meantime wasted away (like timid physicians,
who, dreading to administer remedies, stay waiting, and believe that
what is the decay of the patient's strength is the decline of the
disease), was not taking a right course to heal the sickness of his
country. And first, the great cities of the Samnites, which had revolted,
came into his power; in which he found a large quantity of corn and
money, and three thousand of Hannibal's soldiers, that were left for
the defence. After this, the proconsul Cnaeus Fulvius with eleven
tribunes of the soldiers being slain in Apulia, and the greatest part
of the army also at the same time cut off, he despatched letters to
Rome, and bade the people be of good courage, for that he was now
upon the march against Hannibal, to turn his triumph into sadness.
On these letters being read, Livy writes that the people were not
only not encouraged, but more discouraged than before. For danger,
they thought, was but the greater in proportion as Marcellus was of
more value than Fulvius. He, as he had written, advancing into the
territories of the Lucanians, came up to him at Numistro, and, the
enemy keeping himself upon the hills, pitched his camp in a level
plain, and the next day drew forth his army in order for fight. Nor
did Hannibal refuse the challenge. They fought long and obstinately
on both sides, victory yet seeming undecided, when, after three hours'
conflict, night hardly parted them. The next day, as soon as the sun
was risen, Marcellus again brought forth his troops, and ranged them
among the dead bodies of the slain, challenging Hannibal to solve
the question by another trial. When he dislodged and drew off, Marcellus,
gathering up the spoils of the enemies, and burying the bodies of
his slain soldiers, closely followed him. And though Hannibal often
used stratagems, and laid ambushes to entrap Marcellus, yet he never
could circumvent him. By skirmishes, meantime, in all of which he
was superior, Marcellus gained himself such high repute, that, when
the time of the Comitia at Rome was near at hand, the senate thought
fit rather to recall the other consul from Sicily than to withdraw
Marcellus from his conflict with Hannibal; and on his arrival they
bid him name Quintus Fulvius dictator. For the dictator is created
neither by the people nor by the senate, but the consul of the praetor,
before the popular assembly, pronounces him to be dictator whom he
himself chooses. Hence he is called dictator, dicere meaning to name.
Others say that he is named dictator because his word is a law, and
he orders what he pleases, without submitting it to the vote. For
the Romans call the orders of magistrates Edicts. 

And now because Marcellus's colleague, who was recalled from Sicily,
had a mind to name another man dictator, and would not be forced to
change his opinion, he sailed away by night back to Sicily. So the
common people made an order that Quintus Fulvius should be chosen
dictator: and the senate, by an express, commanded Marcellus to nominate
him. He obeying proclaimed him dictator according to the order of
the people; but the office of proconsul was continued to himself for
a year. And having arranged with Fabius Maximus that, while he besieged
Tarentum, he would, by following Hannibal and drawing him up and down,
detain him from coming to the relief of the Tarentines, he overtook
him at Canusium: and as Hannibal often shifted his camp, and still
declined the combat, he everywhere sought to engage him. At last,
pressing upon him while encamping, by light skirmishes he provoked
him to a battle; but night again divided them in the very heat of
the conflict. The next day Marcellus again showed himself in arms,
and brought up his forces in array. Hannibal, in extreme grief, called
his Carthaginians together to an harangue: and vehemently prayed them
to fight to-day worthily of all their former success; "For you see,"
said he, "how, after such great victories, we have not liberty to
respire, nor to repose ourselves, though victors; unless we drive
this man back." Then the two armies, joining battle, fought fiercely;
when the event of an untimely movement showed Marcellus to have been
guilty of an error. The right wing being hard pressed upon, he commanded
one of the legions to be brought up to the front. This change disturbing
the array and posture of the legions gave the victory to the enemies;
and there fell two thousand seven hundred Romans. Marcellus, after
he had retreated into his camp, called his soldiers together. "I see,"
said he, "many Roman arms and bodies, but I see not so much as one
Roman." To their entreaties for his pardon, he returned a refusal
while they remained beaten, but promised to give it so soon as they
should overcome; and he resolved to bring them into the field again
the next day, that the fame of their victory might arrive at Rome
before that of their flight. Dismissing the assembly, he commanded
barley instead of wheat to be given to those companies that had turned
their backs. These rebukes were so bitter to the soldiers, that though
a great number of them were grievously wounded, yet they relate there
was not one to whom the general's oration was not more painful and
smarting than his wounds. 

The day breaking, a scarlet toga, the sign of instant battle, was
displayed. The companies marked with ignominy begged they might be
posted in the foremost place, and obtained their request. Then the
tribunes bring forth the rest of the forces, and draw them up. On
news of which, "O strange!" said Hannibal, "what will you do with
this man, who can bear neither good nor bad fortune? He is the only
man who neither suffers us to rest when he is victor, nor rests himself
when he is overcome. We shall have, it seems, perpetually to fight
with him; as in good success his confidence, and in ill success his
shame, still urges him to some further enterprise." Then the armies
engaged. When the fight was doubtful, Hannibal commanded the elephants
to be brought into the first battalion, and to be driven upon the
van of the Romans. When the beasts, trampling upon many, soon caused
disorder, Flavius, a tribune of soldiers, snatching an ensign, meets
them, and wounding the first elephant with the spike at the bottom
of the ensign staff, puts him to flight. The beast turned around upon
the next, and drove back both him and the rest that followed. Marcellus,
seeing this, pours in his horse with great force upon the elephants,
and upon the enemy disordered by their flight. The horse, making a
fierce impression, pursued the Carthaginians home to their camp, while
the elephants, wounded and running upon their own party, caused a
considerable slaughter. It is said more than eight thousand were slain;
of the Roman army three thousand, and almost all wounded. This gave
Hannibal opportunity to retire in the silence of the night, and to
remove to greater distance from Marcellus; who was kept from pursuing
by the number of his wounded men, and removed, by gentle marches,
into Campania, and spent the summer at Sinuessa, engaged in restoring
them. 

But as Hannibal, having disentangled himself from Marcellus, ranged
with his army round about the country, and wasted Italy free from
all fear, at Rome Marcellus was evil spoken of. His detractors induced
Publicius Bibulus, tribune of the people, an eloquent and violent
man, to undertake his accusation. He, by assiduous harangues, prevailed
upon the people to withdraw from Marcellus the command of the army;
"Seeing that Marcellus," said he, "after brief exercise in the war,
has withdrawn as it might be from the wrestling ground to the warm
baths to refresh himself." Marcellus, on hearing this, appointed lieutenants
over his camp and hasted to Rome to refute the charges against him:
and there found ready drawn up an impeachment consisting of these
calumnies. At the day prefixed, in the Flaminian circus, into which
place the people had assembled themselves, Bibulus rose and accused
him. Marcellus himself answered, briefly and simply, but the first
and most approved men of the city spoke largely and in high terms,
very freely advising the people not to show themselves worse judges
than the enemy, condemning Marcellus of timidity, from whom alone
of all their captains the enemy fled, and as perpetually endeavoured
to avoid fighting with him as to fight with others. When they made
an end of speaking, the accuser's hope to obtain judgment so far deceived
him, that Marcellus was not only absolved, but the fifth time created
consul. 

No sooner had he entered upon this consulate, but he suppressed a
great commotion in Etruria, that had proceeded near to revolt, and
visited and quieted the cities. Then, when the dedication of the temple,
which he had vowed out of his Sicilian spoils to Honour and Virtue,
was objected to by the priests, because they denied that one temple
could be lawfully dedicated to two gods, he began to adjoin another
to it, resenting the priests' opposition, and almost converting the
thing into an omen. And, truly, many other prodigies also affrighted
him; some temples had been struck with lightning, and in Jupiter's
temple mice had gnawed the gold: it was reported, also, that an ox
had spoken, and that a boy had been born with a head like an elephant's.
All which prodigies had indeed been attended to, but due reconciliation
had not been obtained from the gods. The aruspices therefore detained
him at Rome, glowing and burning with desire to return to the war.
For no man was ever inflamed with so great desire of anything as was
he to fight a battle with Hannibal. It was the subject of his dreams
in the night, the topic of all his consultations with his friends
and familiars, nor did he present to the gods any other wish, but
that he might meet Hannibal in the field. And I think that he would
most gladly have set upon him, with both armies environed within a
single camp. Had he not been even loaded with honours, and had he
not given proofs in many ways of his maturity of judgment and of prudence
equal to that of any commander, you might have said that he was agitated
by a youthful ambition, above what became a man of that age, for he
had passed the sixtieth year of his life when he began his fifth consulship.

The sacrifices having been offered, and all that belonged to the propitiation
of the gods performed, according to the prescription of the diviners,
he at last with his colleague went forth to carry on the war. He tried
all possible means to provoke Hannibal, who at that time had a standing
camp betwixt Bantia and Venusia. Hannibal declined an engagement,
but having obtained intelligence that some troops were on their way
to the town of Locri Epizephyrii, placing an ambush under the little
hill of Petelia, he slew two thousand five hundred soldiers. This
incensed Marcellus to revenge; and he therefore moved nearer Hannibal.
Betwixt the two camps was a little hill, a tolerably secure post,
covered with wood; it had steep descents on either side, and there
were springs of water seen trickling down. This place was so fit and
advantageous that the Romans wondered that Hannibal, who had come
thither before them, had not seized upon it, but had left it to the
enemies. But to him the place had seemed commodious indeed for a camp,
but yet more commodious for an ambuscade; and to that use he chose
to put it. So in the wood and the hollows he hid a number of archers
and spearmen, confident that the commodiousness of the place would
allure the Romans. Nor was he deceived in his expectation. For presently
in the Roman camp they talked and disputed, as if they had all been
captains, how the place ought to be seized, and what great advantage
they should thereby gain upon the enemies, chiefly if they transferred
their camp thither, at any rate, if they strengthened the place with
a fort. Marcellus resolved to go, with a few horse, to view it. Having
called a diviner he proceeded to sacrifice. In the first victim the
aruspex showed him the liver without a head; in the second the head
appeared of unusual size, and all the other indications highly promising.
When these seemed sufficient to free them from the dread of the former,
the diviners declared that they were all the more terrified by the
latter; because entrails too fair and promising, when they appear
after others that are maimed and monstrous, render the change doubtful
and suspicious. But- 

"Nor fire nor brazen wall can keep out fate;" as Pindar observes.
Marcellus, therefore, taking with him his colleague Crispinus, and
his son, a tribune of soldiers, with two hundred and twenty horse
at most (among whom there was not one Roman, but all were Etruscans,
except forty Fregellans, of whose courage and fidelity he had on all
occasions received full proof), goes to view the place. The hill was
covered with woods all over; on the top of it sat a scout concealed
from the sight of the enemy, but having the Roman camp exposed to
his view. Upon signs received from him, the men that were placed in
ambush stirred not till Marcellus came near; and then all starting
up in an instant, and encompassing him from all sides, attacked him
with darts, struck about and wounded the backs of those that fled,
and pressed upon those who resisted. These were the forty Fregellans.
For though the Etruscans fled in the very beginning of the fight,
the Fregellans formed themselves into a ring, bravely defending the
consuls, till Crispinus, struck with two darts, turned his horse to
fly away; and Marcellus's side was run through with a lance with a
broad head. Then the Fregellans, also, the few that remained alive,
leaving the fallen consul, and rescuing young Marcellus, who also
was wounded, got into the camp by flight. There were slain not much
above forty; five lictors and eighteen horsemen came alive into the
enemy's hands. Crispinus also died of his wounds a few days after.
Such a disaster as the loss of both consuls in a single engagement
was one that had never before befallen the Romans. 

Hannibal, little valuing the other events, as soon as he was told
of Marcellus's death, immediately hasted to the hill. Viewing the
body, and continuing for some time to observe its strength and shape,
he allowed not a word to fall from him expressive of the least pride
or arrogancy, nor did he show in his countenance any sign of gladness,
as another perhaps would have done, when his fierce and troublesome
enemy had been taken away; but amazed by so sudden and unexpected
an end, taking off nothing but his ring, gave order to have the body
properly clad and adorned and honourably burned. The relics put into
a silver urn, with a crown of gold to cover it, he sent back to his
son. But some of the Numidians, setting upon these that were carrying
the urn, took it from them by force, and cast away the bones; which
being told to Hannibal, "It is impossible, it seems then," he said,
"to do anything against the will of God!" He punished the Numidians;
but took no further care of sending or re-collecting the bones; conceiving
that Marcellus so fell, and so lay unburied, by a certain fate. So
Cornelius Nepos and Vaerius Maximus have left upon record: but Livy
and Augustus Caesar affirm that the urn was brought to his son, and
honoured with a magnificent funeral. Besides the monuments raised
for him at Rome, there was dedicated to his memory at Catana, in Sicily,
an ample wrestling place called after him; statues and pictures, out
of those he took from Syracuse, were set up in Samothrace, in the
temple of the gods, named Cabiri, and in that of Minerva at Lindus,
where also there was a statue of him, says Posidonius, with the following
inscription:- 

"This was, O stranger, once Rome's star divine, 
Claudius Marcellus of an ancient line; 
To fight her wars seven times her consul made, 
Low in the dust her enemies he laid." The writer of the inscription
has added to Marcellus's five consulates his two proconsulates. His
progeny continued in high honour even down to Marcellus, son of Octavia,
sister of Augustus, whom she bore to her husband Caius Marcellus;
and who died a bridegroom, in the year of his Aedileship, having not
long before married Caesar's daughter. His mother, Octavia, dedicated
the library to his honour and memory, and Caesar the theatre which
bears his name. 

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.
</pre></body></html>
