Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Aristotle/parts_animals.html

On the Parts of Animals
By Aristotle


Translated by William Ogle

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK I

Part 1 

Every systematic science, the humblest and the noblest alike, seems
to admit of two distinct kinds of proficiency; one of which may be
properly called scientific knowledge of the subject, while the other
is a kind of educational acquaintance with it. For an educated man
should be able to form a fair off-hand judgement as to the goodness
or badness of the method used by a professor in his exposition. To
be educated is in fact to be able to do this; and even the man of
universal education we deem to be such in virtue of his having this
ability. It will, however, of course, be understood that we only ascribe
universal education to one who in his own individual person is thus
critical in all or nearly all branches of knowledge, and not to one
who has a like ability merely in some special subject. For it is possible
for a man to have this competence in some one branch of knowledge
without having it in all. 

It is plain then that, as in other sciences, so in that which inquires
into nature, there must be certain canons, by reference to which a
hearer shall be able to criticize the method of a professed exposition,
quite independently of the question whether the statements made be
true or false. Ought we, for instance (to give an illustration of
what I mean), to begin by discussing each separate species-man, lion,
ox, and the like-taking each kind in hand inde. pendently of the rest,
or ought we rather to deal first with the attributes which they have
in common in virtue of some common element of their nature, and proceed
from this as a basis for the consideration of them separately? For
genera that are quite distinct yet oftentimes present many identical
phenomena, sleep, for instance, respiration, growth, decay, death,
and other similar affections and conditions, which may be passed over
for the present, as we are not yet prepared to treat of them with
clearness and precision. Now it is plain that if we deal with each
species independently of the rest, we shall frequently be obliged
to repeat the same statements over and over again; for horse and dog
and man present, each and all, every one of the phenomena just enumerated.
A discussion therefore of the attributes of each such species separately
would necessarily involve frequent repetitions as to characters, themselves
identical but recurring in animals specifically distinct. (Very possibly
also there may be other characters which, though they present specific
differences, yet come under one and the same category. For instance,
flying, swimming, walking, creeping, are plainly specifically distinct,
but yet are all forms of animal progression.) We must, then, have
some clear understanding as to the manner in which our investigation
is to be conducted; whether, I mean, we are first to deal with the
common or generic characters, and afterwards to take into consideration
special peculiarities; or whether we are to start straight off with
the ultimate species. For as yet no definite rule has been laid down
in this matter. So also there is a like uncertainty as to another
point now to be mentioned. Ought the writer who deals with the works
of nature to follow the plan adopted by the mathematicians in their
astronomical demonstrations, and after considering the phenomena presented
by animals, and their several parts, proceed subsequently to treat
of the causes and the reason why; or ought he to follow some other
method? And when these questions are answered, there yet remains another.
The causes concerned in the generation of the works of nature are,
as we see, more than one. There is the final cause and there is the
motor cause. Now we must decide which of these two causes comes first,
which second. Plainly, however, that cause is the first which we call
the final one. For this is the Reason, and the Reason forms the starting-point,
alike in the works of art and in works of nature. For consider how
the physician or how the builder sets about his work. He starts by
forming for himself a definite picture, in the one case perceptible
to mind, in the other to sense, of his end-the physician of health,
the builder of a house-and this he holds forward as the reason and
explanation of each subsequent step that he takes, and of his acting
in this or that way as the case may be. Now in the works of nature
the good end and the final cause is still more dominant than in works
of art such as these, nor is necessity a factor with the same significance
in them all; though almost all writers, while they try to refer their
origin to this cause, do so without distinguishing the various senses
in which the term necessity is used. For there is absolute necessity,
manifested in eternal phenomena; and there is hypothetical necessity,
manifested in everything that is generated by nature as in everything
that is produced by art, be it a house or what it may. For if a house
or other such final object is to be realized, it is necessary that
such and such material shall exist; and it is necessary that first
this then that shall be produced, and first this and then that set
in motion, and so on in continuous succession, until the end and final
result is reached, for the sake of which each prior thing is produced
and exists. As with these productions of art, so also is it with the
productions of nature. The mode of necessity, however, and the mode
of ratiocination are different in natural science from what they are
in the theoretical sciences; of which we have spoken elsewhere. For
in the latter the starting-point is that which is; in the former that
which is to be. For it is that which is yet to be-health, let us say,
or a man-that, owing to its being of such and such characters, necessitates
the pre-existence or previous production of this and that antecedent;
and not this or that antecedent which, because it exists or has been
generated, makes it necessary that health or a man is in, or shall
come into, existence. Nor is it possible to track back the series
of necessary antecedents to a starting-point, of which you can say
that, existing itself from eternity, it has determined their existence
as its consequent. These however again, are matters that have been
dealt with in another treatise. There too it was stated in what cases
absolute and hypothetical necessity exist; in what cases also the
proposition expressing hypothetical necessity is simply convertible,
and what cause it is that determines this convertibility.

Another matter which must not be passed over without consideration
is, whether the proper subject of our exposition is that with which
the ancient writers concerned themselves, namely, what is the process
of formation of each animal; or whether it is not rather, what are
the characters of a given creature when formed. For there is no small
difference between these two views. The best course appears to be
that we should follow the method already mentioned, and begin with
the phenomena presented by each group of animals, and, when this is
done, proceed afterwards to state the causes of those phenomena, and
to deal with their evolution. For elsewhere, as for instance in house
building, this is the true sequence. The plan of the house, or the
house, has this and that form; and because it has this and that form,
therefore is its construction carried out in this or that manner.
For the process of evolution is for the sake of the thing finally evolved,
and not this for the sake of the process. Empedocles, then, was in
error when he said that many of the characters presented by animals
were merely the results of incidental occurrences during their development;
for instance, that the backbone was divided as it is into vertebrae,
because it happened to be broken owing to the contorted position of
the foetus in the womb. In so saying he overlooked the fact that propagation
implies a creative seed endowed with certain formative properties.
Secondly, he neglected another fact, namely, that the parent animal
pre-exists, not only in idea, but actually in time. For man is generated
from man; and thus it is the possession of certain characters by the
parent that determines the development of like characters in the child.
The same statement holds good also for the operations of art, and
even for those which are apparently spontaneous. For the same result
as is produced by art may occur spontaneously. Spontaneity, for instance,
may bring about the restoration of health. The products of art, however,
require the pre-existence of an efficient cause homogeneous with themselves,
such as the statuary's art, which must necessarily precede the statue;
for this cannot possibly be produced spontaneously. Art indeed consists
in the conception of the result to be produced before its realization
in the material. As with spontaneity, so with chance; for this also
produces the same result as art, and by the same process.

The fittest mode, then, of treatment is to say, a man has such and
such parts, because the conception of a man includes their presence,
and because they are necessary conditions of his existence, or, if
we cannot quite say this, which would be best of all, then the next
thing to it, namely, that it is either quite impossible for him to
exist without them, or, at any rate, that it is better for him that
they should be there; and their existence involves the existence of
other antecedents. Thus we should say, because man is an animal with
such and such characters, therefore is the process of his development
necessarily such as it is; and therefore is it accomplished in such
and such an order, this part being formed first, that next, and so
on in succession; and after a like fashion should we explain the evolution
of all other works of nature. 

Now that with which the ancient writers, who first philosophized about
Nature, busied themselves, was the material principle and the material
cause. They inquired what this is, and what its character; how the
universe is generated out of it, and by what motor influence, whether,
for instance, by antagonism or friendship, whether by intelligence
or spontaneous action, the substratum of matter being assumed to have
certain inseparable properties; fire, for instance, to have a hot
nature, earth a cold one; the former to be light, the latter heavy.
For even the genesis of the universe is thus explained by them. After
a like fashion do they deal also with the development of plants and
of animals. They say, for instance, that the water contained in the
body causes by its currents the formation of the stomach and the other
receptacles of food or of excretion; and that the breath by its passage
breaks open the outlets of the nostrils; air and water being the materials
of which bodies are made; for all represent nature as composed of
such or similar substances. 

But if men and animals and their several parts are natural phenomena,
then the natural philosopher must take into consideration not merely
the ultimate substances of which they are made, but also flesh, bone,
blood, and all other homogeneous parts; not only these, but also the
heterogeneous parts, such as face, hand, foot; and must examine how
each of these comes to be what it is, and in virtue of what force.
For to say what are the ultimate substances out of which an animal
is formed, to state, for instance, that it is made of fire or earth,
is no more sufficient than would be a similar account in the case
of a couch or the like. For we should not be content with saying that
the couch was made of bronze or wood or whatever it might be, but
should try to describe its design or mode of composition in preference
to the material; or, if we did deal with the material, it would at
any rate be with the concretion of material and form. For a couch
is such and such a form embodied in this or that matter, or such and
such a matter with this or that form; so that its shape and structure
must be included in our description. For the formal nature is of greater
importance than the material nature. 

Does, then, configuration and colour constitute the essence of the
various animals and of their several parts? For if so, what Democritus
says will be strictly correct. For such appears to have been his notion.
At any rate he says that it is evident to every one what form it is
that makes the man, seeing that he is recognizable by his shape and
colour. And yet a dead body has exactly the same configuration as
a living one; but for all that is not a man. So also no hand of bronze
or wood or constituted in any but the appropriate way can possibly
be a hand in more than name. For like a physician in a painting, or
like a flute in a sculpture, in spite of its name it will be unable
to do the office which that name implies. Precisely in the same way
no part of a dead body, such I mean as its eye or its hand, is really
an eye or a hand. To say, then, that shape and colour constitute the
animal is an inadequate statement, and is much the same as if a woodcarver
were to insist that the hand he had cut out was really a hand. Yet
the physiologists, when they give an account of the development and
causes of the animal form, speak very much like such a craftsman.
What, however, I would ask, are the forces by which the hand or the
body was fashioned into its shape? The woodcarver will perhaps say,
by the axe or the auger; the physiologist, by air and by earth. Of
these two answers the artificer's is the better, but it is nevertheless
insufficient. For it is not enough for him to say that by the stroke
of his tool this part was formed into a concavity, that into a flat
surface; but he must state the reasons why he struck his blow in such
a way as to effect this, and what his final object was; namely, that
the piece of wood should develop eventually into this or that shape.
It is plain, then, that the teaching of the old physiologists is inadequate,
and that the true method is to state what the definitive characters
are that distinguish the animal as a whole; to explain what it is
both in substance and in form, and to deal after the same fashion
with its several organs; in fact, to proceed in exactly the same way
as we should do, were we giving a complete description of a couch.

If now this something that constitutes the form of the living being
be the soul, or part of the soul, or something that without the soul
cannot exist; as would seem to be the case, seeing at any rate that
when the soul departs, what is left is no longer a living animal,
and that none of the parts remain what they were before, excepting
in mere configuration, like the animals that in the fable are turned
into stone; if, I say, this be so, then it will come within the province
of the natural philosopher to inform himself concerning the soul,
and to treat of it, either in its entirety, or, at any rate, of that
part of it which constitutes the essential character of an animal;
and it will be his duty to say what this soul or this part of a soul
is; and to discuss the attributes that attach to this essential character,
especially as nature is spoken of in two senses, and the nature of
a thing is either its matter or its essence; nature as essence including
both the motor cause and the final cause. Now it is in the latter
of these two senses that either the whole soul or some part of it
constitutes the nature of an animal; and inasmuch as it is the presence
of the soul that enables matter to constitute the animal nature, much
more than it is the presence of matter which so enables the soul,
the inquirer into nature is bound on every ground to treat of the
soul rather than of the matter. For though the wood of which they
are made constitutes the couch and the tripod, it only does so because
it is capable of receiving such and such a form. 

What has been said suggests the question, whether it is the whole
soul or only some part of it, the consideration of which comes within
the province of natural science. Now if it be of the whole soul that
this should treat, then there is no place for any other philosophy
beside it. For as it belongs in all cases to one and the same science
to deal with correlated subjects-one and the same science, for instance,
deals with sensation and with the objects of sense-and as therefore
the intelligent soul and the objects of intellect, being correlated,
must belong to one and the same science, it follows that natural science
will have to include the whole universe in its province. But perhaps
it is not the whole soul, nor all its parts collectively, that constitutes
the source of motion; but there may be one part, identical with that
in plants, which is the source of growth, another, namely the sensory
part, which is the source of change of quality, while still another,
and this not the intellectual part, is the source of locomotion. I
say not the intellectual part; for other animals than man have the
power of locomotion, but in none but him is there intellect. Thus
then it is plain that it is not of the whole soul that we have to
treat. For it is not the whole soul that constitutes the animal nature,
but only some part or parts of it. Moreover, it is impossible that
any abstraction can form a subject of natural science, seeing that
everything that Nature makes is means to an end. For just as human
creations are the products of art, so living objects are manifest
in the products of an analogous cause or principle, not external but
internal, derived like the hot and the cold from the environing universe.
And that the heaven, if it had an origin, was evolved and is maintained
by such a cause, there is therefore even more reason to believe, than
that mortal animals so originated. For order and definiteness are
much more plainly manifest in the celestial bodies than in our own
frame; while change and chance are characteristic of the perishable
things of earth. Yet there are some who, while they allow that every
animal exists and was generated by nature, nevertheless hold that
the heaven was constructed to be what it is by chance and spontaneity;
the heaven, in which not the faintest sign of haphazard or of disorder
is discernible! Again, whenever there is plainly some final end, to
which a motion tends should nothing stand in the way, we always say
that such final end is the aim or purpose of the motion; and from
this it is evident that there must be a something or other really
existing, corresponding to what we call by the name of Nature. For
a given germ does not give rise to any chance living being, nor spring
from any chance one; but each germ springs from a definite parent
and gives rise to a definite progeny. And thus it is the germ that
is the ruling influence and fabricator of the offspring. For these
it is by nature, the offspring being at any rate that which in nature
will spring from it. At the same time the offspring is anterior to
the germ; for germ and perfected progeny are related as the developmental
process and the result. Anterior, however, to both germ and product
is the organism from which the germ was derived. For every germ implies
two organisms, the parent and the progeny. For germ or seed is both
the seed of the organism from which it came, of the horse, for instance,
from which it was derived, and the seed of the organism that will
eventually arise from it, of the mule, for example, which is developed
from the seed of the horse. The same seed then is the seed both of
the horse and of the mule, though in different ways as here set forth.
Moreover, the seed is potentially that which will spring from it,
and the relation of potentiality to actuality we know. 

There are then two causes, namely, necessity and the final end. For
many things are produced, simply as the results of necessity. It may,
however, be asked, of what mode of necessity are we speaking when
we say this. For it can be of neither of those two modes which are
set forth in the philosophical treatises. There is, however, the third
mode, in such things at any rate as are generated. For instance, we
say that food is necessary; because an animal cannot possibly do without
it. This third mode is what may be called hypothetical necessity.
Here is another example of it. If a piece of wood is to be split with
an axe, the axe must of necessity be hard; and, if hard, must of necessity
be made of bronze or iron. Now exactly in the same way the body, which
like the axe is an instrument-for both the body as a whole and its
several parts individually have definite operations for which they
are made-just in the same way, I say, the body, if it is to do its
work, must of necessity be of such and such a character, and made
of such and such materials. 

It is plain then that there are two modes of causation, and that both
of these must, so far as possible, be taken into account in explaining
the works of nature, or that at any rate an attempt must be made to
include them both; and that those who fail in this tell us in reality
nothing about nature. For primary cause constitutes the nature of
an animal much more than does its matter. There are indeed passages
in which even Empedocles hits upon this, and following the guidance
of fact, finds himself constrained to speak of the ratio (olugos)
as constituting the essence and real nature of things. Such, for instance,
is the case when he explains what is a bone. For he does not merely
describe its material, and say it is this one element, or those two
or three elements, or a compound of all the elements, but states the
ratio (olugos) of their combination. As with a bone, so manifestly
is it with the flesh and all other similar parts. 

The reason why our predecessors failed in hitting upon this method
of treatment was, that they were not in possession of the notion of
essence, nor of any definition of substance. The first who came near
it was Democritus, and he was far from adopting it as a necessary
method in natural science, but was merely brought to it, spite of
himself, by constraint of facts. In the time of Socrates a nearer
approach was made to the method. But at this period men gave up inquiring
into the works of nature, and philosophers diverted their attention
to political science and to the virtues which benefit mankind.

Of the method itself the following is an example. In dealing with
respiration we must show that it takes place for such or such a final
object; and we must also show that this and that part of the process
is necessitated by this and that other stage of it. By necessity we
shall sometimes mean hypothetical necessity, the necessity, that is,
that the requisite antecedants shall be there, if the final end is
to be reached; and sometimes absolute necessity, such necessity as
that which connects substances and their inherent properties and characters.
For the alternate discharge and re-entrance of heat and the inflow
of air are necessary if we are to live. Here we have at once a necessity
in the former of the two senses. But the alternation of heat and refrigeration
produces of necessity an alternate admission and discharge of the
outer air, and this is a necessity of the second kind. 

In the foregoing we have an example of the method which we must adopt,
and also an example of the kind of phenomena, the causes of which
we have to investigate. 

Part 2

Some writers propose to reach the definitions of the ultimate forms
of animal life by bipartite division. But this method is often difficult,
and often impracticable. 

Sometimes the final differentia of the subdivision is sufficient by
itself, and the antecedent differentiae are mere surplusage. Thus
in the series Footed, Two-footed, Cleft-footed, the last term is all-expressive
by itself, and to append the higher terms is only an idle iteration.
Again it is not permissible to break up a natural group, Birds for
instance, by putting its members under different bifurcations, as
is done in the published dichotomies, where some birds are ranked
with animals of the water, and others placed in a different class.
The group Birds and the group Fishes happen to be named, while other
natural groups have no popular names; for instance, the groups that
we may call Sanguineous and Bloodless are not known popularly by any
designations. If such natural groups are not to be broken up, the
method of Dichotomy cannot be employed, for it necessarily involves
such breaking up and dislocation. The group of the Many-footed, for
instance, would, under this method, have to be dismembered, and some
of its kinds distributed among land animals, others among water animals.

Part 3

Again, privative terms inevitably form one branch of dichotomous division,
as we see in the proposed dichotomies. But privative terms in their
character of privatives admit of no subdivision. For there can be
no specific forms of a negation, of Featherless for instance or of
Footless, as there are of Feathered and of Footed. Yet a generic differentia
must be subdivisible; for otherwise what is there that makes it generic
rather than specific? There are to be found generic, that is specifically
subdivisible, differentiae; Feathered for instance and Footed. For
feathers are divisible into Barbed and Unbarbed, and feet into Manycleft,
and Twocleft, like those of animals with bifid hoofs, and Uncleft
or Undivided, like those of animals with solid hoofs. Now even with
differentiae capable of this specific subdivision it is difficult
enough so to make the classification, as that each animal shall be
comprehended in some one subdivision and in not more than one; but
far more difficult, nay impossible, is it to do this, if we start
with a dichotomy into two contradictories. (Suppose for instance we
start with the two contradictories, Feathered and Unfeathered; we
shall find that the ant, the glow-worm, and some other animals fall
under both divisions.) For each differentia must be presented by some
species. There must be some species, therefore, under the privative
heading. Now specifically distinct animals cannot present in their
essence a common undifferentiated element, but any apparently common
element must really be differentiated. (Bird and Man for instance
are both Two-footed, but their two-footedness is diverse and differentiated.
So any two sanguineous groups must have some difference in their blood,
if their blood is part of their essence.) From this it follows that
a privative term, being insusceptible of differentiation, cannot be
a generic differentia; for, if it were, there would be a common undifferentiated
element in two different groups. 

Again, if the species are ultimate indivisible groups, that is, are
groups with indivisible differentiae, and if no differentia be common
to several groups, the number of differentiae must be equal to the
number of species. If a differentia though not divisible could yet
be common to several groups, then it is plain that in virtue of that
common differentia specifically distinct animals would fall into the
same division. It is necessary then, if the differentiae, under which
are ranged all the ultimate and indivisible groups, are specific characters,
that none of them shall be common; for otherwise, as already said,
specifically distinct animals will come into one and the same division.
But this would violate one of the requisite conditions, which are
as follows. No ultimate group must be included in more than a single
division; different groups must not be included in the same division;
and every group must be found in some division. It is plain then that
we cannot get at the ultimate specific forms of the animal, or any
other, kingdom by bifurcate division. If we could, the number of ultimate
differentiae would equal the number of ultimate animal forms. For
assume an order of beings whose prime differentiae are White and Black.
Each of these branches will bifurcate, and their branches again, and
so on till we reach the ultimate differentiae, whose number will be
four or some other power of two, and will also be the number of the
ultimate species comprehended in the order. 

(A species is constituted by the combination differentia and matter.
For no part of an animal is purely material or purely immaterial;
nor can a body, independently of its condition, constitute an animal
or any of its parts, as has repeatedly been observed.) 

Further, the differentiae must be elements of the essence, and not
merely essential attributes. Thus if Figure is the term to be divided,
it must not be divided into figures whose angles are equal to two
right angles, and figures whose angles are together greater than two
right angles. For it is only an attribute of a triangle and not part
of its essence that its angles are equal to two right angles.

Again, the bifurcations must be opposites, like White and Black, Straight
and Bent; and if we characterize one branch by either term, we must
characterize the other by its opposite, and not, for example, characterize
one branch by a colour, the other by a mode of progression, swimming
for instance. 

Furthermore, living beings cannot be divided by the functions common
to body and soul, by Flying, for instance, and Walking, as we see
them divided in the dichotomies already referred to. For some groups,
Ants for instance, fall under both divisions, some ants flying while
others do not. Similarly as regards the division into Wild and Tame;
for it also would involve the disruption of a species into different
groups. For in almost all species in which some members are tame,
there are other members that are wild. Such, for example, is the case
with Men, Horses, Oxen, Dogs in India, Pigs, Goats, Sheep; groups
which, if double, ought to have what they have not, namely, different
appellations; and which, if single, prove that Wildness and Tameness
do not amount to specific differences. And whatever single element
we take as a basis of division the same difficulty will occur.

The method then that we must adopt is to attempt to recognize the
natural groups, following the indications afforded by the instincts
of mankind, which led them for instance to form the class of Birds
and the class of Fishes, each of which groups combines a multitude
of differentiae, and is not defined by a single one as in dichotomy.
The method of dichotomy is either impossible (for it would put a single
group under different divisions or contrary groups under the same
division), or it only furnishes a single ultimate differentia for
each species, which either alone or with its series of antecedents
has to constitute the ultimate species. 

If, again, a new differential character be introduced at any stage
into the division, the necessary result is that the continuity of
the division becomes merely a unity and continuity of agglomeration,
like the unity and continuity of a series of sentences coupled together
by conjunctive particles. For instance, suppose we have the bifurcation
Feathered and Featherless, and then divide Feathered into Wild and
Tame, or into White and Black. Tame and White are not a differentiation
of Feathered, but are the commencement of an independent bifurcation,
and are foreign to the series at the end of which they are introduced.

As we said then, we must define at the outset by multiplicity of differentiae.
If we do so, privative terms will be available, which are unavailable
to the dichotomist. 

The impossibility of reaching the definition of any of the ultimate
forms by dichotomy of the larger group, as some propose, is manifest
also from the following considerations. It is impossible that a single
differentia, either by itself or with its antecedents, shall express
the whole essence of a species. (In saying a single differentia by
itself I mean such an isolated differentia as Cleft-footed; in saying
a single differentia with antecedent I mean, to give an instance,
Manycleft-footed preceded by Cleft-footed. The very continuity of
a series of successive differentiae in a division is intended to show
that it is their combination that expresses the character of the resulting
unit, or ultimate group. But one is misled by the usages of language
into imagining that it is merely the final term of the series, Manycleft-footed
for instance, that constitutes the whole differentia, and that the
antecedent terms, Footed, Cleft-footed, are superfluous. Now it is
evident that such a series cannot consist of many terms. For if one
divides and subdivides, one soon reaches the final differential term,
but for all that will not have got to the ultimate division, that
is, to the species.) No single differentia, I repeat, either by itself
or with its antecedents, can possibly express the essence of a species.
Suppose, for example, Man to be the animal to be defined; the single
differentia will be Cleft-footed, either by itself or with its antecedents,
Footed and Two-footed. Now if man was nothing more than a Cleft-footed
animal, this single differentia would duly represent his essence.
But seeing that this is not the case, more differentiae than this
one will necessarily be required to define him; and these cannot come
under one division; for each single branch of a dichotomy ends in
a single differentia, and cannot possibly include several differentiae
belonging to one and the same animal. 

It is impossible then to reach any of the ultimate animal forms by
dichotomous division. 

Part 4

It deserves inquiry why a single name denoting a higher group was
not invented by mankind, as an appellation to comprehend the two groups
of Water animals and Winged animals. For even these have certain attributes
in common. However, the present nomenclature is just. Groups that
only differ in degree, and in the more or less of an identical element
that they possess, are aggregated under a single class; groups whose
attributes are not identical but analogous are separated. For instance,
bird differs from bird by gradation, or by excess and defect; some
birds have long feathers, others short ones, but all are feathered.
Bird and Fish are more remote and only agree in having analogous organs;
for what in the bird is feather, in the fish is scale. Such analogies
can scarcely, however, serve universally as indications for the formation
of groups, for almost all animals present analogies in their corresponding
parts. 

The individuals comprised within a species, such as Socrates and Coriscus,
are the real existences; but inasmuch as these individuals possess
one common specific form, it will suffice to state the universal attributes
of the species, that is, the attributes common to all its individuals,
once for all, as otherwise there will be endless reiteration, as has
already been pointed out. 

But as regards the larger groups-such as Birds-which comprehend many
species, there may be a question. For on the one hand it may be urged
that as the ultimate species represent the real existences, it will
be well, if practicable, to examine these ultimate species separately,
just as we examine the species Man separately; to examine, that is,
not the whole class Birds collectively, but the Ostrich, the Crane,
and the other indivisible groups or species belonging to the class.

On the other hand, however, this course would involve repeated mention
of the same attribute, as the same attribute is common to many species,
and so far would be somewhat irrational and tedious. Perhaps, then,
it will be best to treat generically the universal attributes of the
groups that have a common nature and contain closely allied subordinate
forms, whether they are groups recognized by a true instinct of mankind,
such as Birds and Fishes, or groups not popularly known by a common
appellation, but withal composed of closely allied subordinate groups;
and only to deal individually with the attributes of a single species,
when such species, man, for instance, and any other such, if such
there be-stands apart from others, and does not constitute with them
a larger natural group. 

It is generally similarity in the shape of particular organs, or of
the whole body, that has determined the formation of the larger groups.
It is in virtue of such a similarity that Birds, Fishes, Cephalopoda,
and Testacea have been made to form each a separate class. For within
the limits of each such class, the parts do not differ in that they
have no nearer resemblance than that of analogy-such as exists between
the bone of man and the spine of fish-but differ merely in respect
of such corporeal conditions as largeness smallness, softness hardness,
smoothness roughness, and other similar oppositions, or, in one word,
in respect of degree. 

We have now touched upon the canons for criticizing the method of
natural science, and have considered what is the most systematic and
easy course of investigation; we have also dealt with division, and
the mode of conducting it so as best to attain the ends of science,
and have shown why dichotomy is either impracticable or inefficacious
for its professed purposes. 

Having laid this foundation, let us pass on to our next topic.

Part 5

Of things constituted by nature some are ungenerated, imperishable,
and eternal, while others are subject to generation and decay. The
former are excellent beyond compare and divine, but less accessible
to knowledge. The evidence that might throw light on them, and on
the problems which we long to solve respecting them, is furnished
but scantily by sensation; whereas respecting perishable plants and
animals we have abundant information, living as we do in their midst,
and ample data may be collected concerning all their various kinds,
if only we are willing to take sufficient pains. Both departments,
however, have their special charm. The scanty conceptions to which
we can attain of celestial things give us, from their excellence,
more pleasure than all our knowledge of the world in which we live;
just as a half glimpse of persons that we love is more delightful
than a leisurely view of other things, whatever their number and dimensions.
On the other hand, in certitude and in completeness our knowledge
of terrestrial things has the advantage. Moreover, their greater nearness
and affinity to us balances somewhat the loftier interest of the heavenly
things that are the objects of the higher philosophy. Having already
treated of the celestial world, as far as our conjectures could reach,
we proceed to treat of animals, without omitting, to the best of our
ability, any member of the kingdom, however ignoble. For if some have
no graces to charm the sense, yet even these, by disclosing to intellectual
perception the artistic spirit that designed them, give immense pleasure
to all who can trace links of causation, and are inclined to philosophy.
Indeed, it would be strange if mimic representations of them were
attractive, because they disclose the mimetic skill of the painter
or sculptor, and the original realities themselves were not more interesting,
to all at any rate who have eyes to discern the reasons that determined
their formation. We therefore must not recoil with childish aversion
from the examination of the humbler animals. Every realm of nature
is marvellous: and as Heraclitus, when the strangers who came to visit
him found him warming himself at the furnace in the kitchen and hesitated
to go in, reported to have bidden them not to be afraid to enter,
as even in that kitchen divinities were present, so we should venture
on the study of every kind of animal without distaste; for each and
all will reveal to us something natural and something beautiful. Absence
of haphazard and conduciveness of everything to an end are to be found
in Nature's works in the highest degree, and the resultant end of
her generations and combinations is a form of the beautiful.

If any person thinks the examination of the rest of the animal kingdom
an unworthy task, he must hold in like disesteem the study of man.
For no one can look at the primordia of the human frame-blood, flesh,
bones, vessels, and the like-without much repugnance. Moreover, when
any one of the parts or structures, be it which it may, is under discussion,
it must not be supposed that it is its material composition to which
attention is being directed or which is the object of the discussion,
but the relation of such part to the total form. Similarly, the true
object of architecture is not bricks, mortar, or timber, but the house;
and so the principal object of natural philosophy is not the material
elements, but their composition, and the totality of the form, independently
of which they have no existence. 

The course of exposition must be first to state the attributes common
to whole groups of animals, and then to attempt to give their explanation.
Many groups, as already noticed, present common attributes, that is
to say, in some cases absolutely identical affections, and absolutely
identical organs,-feet, feathers, scales, and the like-while in other
groups the affections and organs are only so far identical as that
they are analogous. For instance, some groups have lungs, others have
no lung, but an organ analogous to a lung in its place; some have
blood, others have no blood, but a fluid analogous to blood, and with
the same office. To treat of the common attributes in connexion with
each individual group would involve, as already suggested, useless
iteration. For many groups have common attributes. So much for this
topic. 

As every instrument and every bodily member subserves some partial
end, that is to say, some special action, so the whole body must be
destined to minister to some Plenary sphere of action. Thus the saw
is made for sawing, for sawing is a function, and not sawing for the
saw. Similarly, the body too must somehow or other be made for the
soul, and each part of it for some subordinate function, to which
it is adapted. 

We have, then, first to describe the common functions, common, that
is, to the whole animal kingdom, or to certain large groups, or to
the members of a species. In other words, we have to describe the
attributes common to all animals, or to assemblages, like the class
of Birds, of closely allied groups differentiated by gradation, or
to groups like Man not differentiated into subordinate groups. In
the first case the common attributes may be called analogous, in the
second generic, in the third specific. 

When a function is ancillary to another, a like relation manifestly
obtains between the organs which discharge these functions; and similarly,
if one function is prior to and the end of another, their respective
organs will stand to each other in the same relation. Thirdly, the
existence of these parts involves that of other things as their necessary
consequents. 

Instances of what I mean by functions and affections are Reproduction,
Growth, Copulation, Waking, Sleep, Locomotion, and other similar vital
actions. Instances of what I mean by parts are Nose, Eye, Face, and
other so-called members or limbs, and also the more elementary parts
of which these are made. So much for the method to be pursued. Let
us now try to set forth the causes of all vital phenomena, whether
universal or particular, and in so doing let us follow that order
of exposition which conforms, as we have indicated, to the order of
nature. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK II

Part 1 

The nature and the number of the parts of which animals are severally
composed are matters which have already been set forth in detail in
the book of Researches about Animals. We have now to inquire what
are the causes that in each case have determined this composition,
a subject quite distinct from that dealt with in the Researches.

Now there are three degrees of composition; and of these the first
in order, as all will allow, is composition out of what some call
the elements, such as earth, air, water, fire. Perhaps, however, it
would be more accurate to say composition out of the elementary forces;
nor indeed out of all of these, but out of a limited number of them,
as defined in previous treatises. For fluid and solid, hot and cold,
form the material of all composite bodies; and all other differences
are secondary to these, such differences, that is, as heaviness or
lightness, density or rarity, roughness or smoothness, and any other
such properties of matter as there may be. second degree of composition
is that by which the homogeneous parts of animals, such as bone, flesh,
and the like, are constituted out of the primary substances. The third
and last stage is the composition which forms the heterogeneous parts,
such as face, hand, and the rest. 

Now the order of actual development and the order of logical existence
are always the inverse of each other. For that which is posterior
in the order of development is antecedent in the order of nature,
and that is genetically last which in nature is first. 

(That this is so is manifest by induction; for a house does not exist
for the sake of bricks and stones, but these materials for the sake
of the house; and the same is the case with the materials of other
bodies. Nor is induction required to show this. it is included in
our conception of generation. For generation is a process from a something
to a something; that which is generated having a cause in which it
originates and a cause in which it ends. The originating cause is
the primary efficient cause, which is something already endowed with
tangible existence, while the final cause is some definite form or
similar end; for man generates man, and plant generates plant, in
each case out of the underlying material.) 

In order of time, then, the material and the generative process must
necessarily be anterior to the being that is generated; but in logical
order the definitive character and form of each being precedes the
material. This is evident if one only tries to define the process
of formation. For the definition of house-building includes and presupposes
that of the house; but the definition of the house does not include
nor presuppose that of house-building; and the same is true of all
other productions. So that it must necessarily be that the elementary
material exists for the sake of the homogeneous parts, seeing that
these are genetically posterior to it, just as the heterogeneous parts
are posterior genetically to them. For these heterogeneous parts have
reached the end and goal, having the third degree of composition,
in which degree generation or development often attains its final
term. 

Animals, then, are composed of homogeneous parts, and are also composed
of heterogeneous parts. The former, however, exist for the sake of
the latter. For the active functions and operations of the body are
carried on by these; that is, by the heterogeneous parts, such as
the eye, the nostril, the whole face, the fingers, the hand, and the
whole arm. But inasmuch as there is a great variety in the functions
and motions not only of aggregate animals but also of the individual
organs, it is necessary that the substances out of which these are
composed shall present a diversity of properties. For some purposes
softness is advantageous, for others hardness; some parts must be
capable of extension, others of flexion. Such properties, then, are
distributed separately to the different homogeneous parts, one being
soft another hard, one fluid another solid, one viscous another brittle;
whereas each of the heterogeneous parts presents a combination of
multifarious properties. For the hand, to take an example, requires
one property to enable it to effect pressure, and another and different
property for simple prehension. For this reason the active or executive
parts of the body are compounded out of bones, sinews, flesh, and
the like, but not these latter out of the former. 

So far, then, as has yet been stated, the relations between these
two orders of parts are determined by a final cause. We have, however,
to inquire whether necessity may not also have a share in the matter;
and it must be admitted that these mutual relations could not from
the very beginning have possibly been other than they are. For heterogeneous
parts can be made up out of homogeneous parts, either from a plurality
of them, or from a single one, as is the case with some of the viscera
which, varying in configuration, are yet, to speak broadly, formed
from a single homogeneous substance; but that homogeneous substances
should be formed out of a combination of heterogeneous parts is clearly
an impossibility. For these causes, then, some parts of animals are
simple and homogeneous, while others are composite and heterogeneous;
and dividing the parts into the active or executive and the sensitive,
each one of the former is, as before said, heterogeneous, and each
one of the latter homogeneous. For it is in homogeneous parts alone
that sensation can occur, as the following considerations show.

Each sense is confined to a single order of sensibles, and its organ
must be such as to admit the action of that kind or order. But it
is only that which is endowed with a property in posse that is acted
on by that which has the like property in esse, so that the two are
the same in kind, and if the latter is single so also is the former.
Thus it is that while no physiologists ever dream of saying of the
hand or face or other such part that one is earth, another water,
another fire, they couple each separate sense-organ with a separate
element, asserting this one to be air and that other to be fire.

Sensation, then, is confined to the simple or homogeneous parts. But,
as might reasonably be expected, the organ of touch, though still
homogeneous, is yet the least simple of all the sense-organs. For
touch more than any other sense appears to be correlated to several
distinct kinds of objects, and to recognize more than one category
of contrasts, heat and cold, for instance, solidity and fluidity,
and other similar oppositions. Accordingly, the organ which deals
with these varied objects is of all the sense-organs the most corporeal,
being either the flesh, or the substance which in some animals takes
the place of flesh. 

Now as there cannot possibly be an animal without sensation, it follows
as a necessary consequence that every animal must have some homogeneous
parts; for these alone are capable of sensation, the heterogeneous
parts serving for the active functions. Again, as the sensory faculty,
the motor faculty, and the nutritive faculty are all lodged in one
and the same part of the body, as was stated in a former treatise,
it is necessary that the part which is the primary seat of these principles
shall on the one hand, in its character of general sensory recipient,
be one of the simple parts; and on the other hand shall, in its motor
and active character, be one of the heterogeneous parts. For this
reason it is the heart which in sanguineous animals constitutes this
central part, and in bloodless animals it is that which takes the
place of a heart. For the heart, like the other viscera, is one of
the homogeneous parts; for, if cut up, its pieces are homogeneous
in substance with each other. But it is at the same time heterogeneous
in virtue of its definite configuration. And the same is true of the
other so-called viscera, which are indeed formed from the same material
as the heart. For all these viscera have a sanguineous character owing
to their being situated upon vascular ducts and branches. For just
as a stream of water deposits mud, so the various viscera, the heart
excepted, are, as it were, deposits from the stream of blood in the
vessels. And as to the heart, the very starting-point of the vessels,
and the actual seat of the force by which the blood is first fabricated,
it is but what one would naturally expect, that out of the selfsame
nutriment of which it is the recipient its own proper substance shall
be formed. Such, then, are the reasons why the viscera are of sanguineous
aspect; and why in one point of view they are homogeneous, in another
heterogeneous. 

Part 2

Of the homogeneous parts of animals, some are soft and fluid, others
hard and solid; and of the former some are fluid permanently, others
only so long as they are in the living body. Such are blood, serum,
lard, suet, marrow, semen, bile, milk when present, flesh, and their
various analogues. For the parts enumerated are not to be found in
all animals, some animals only having parts analogous to them. Of
the hard and solid homogeneous parts bone, fish-spine, sinew, blood-vessel,
are examples. The last of these points to a sub-division that may
be made in the class of homogeneous parts. For in some of them the
whole and a portion of the whole in one sense are designated by the
same term-as, for example, is the case with blood-vessel and bit of
blood-vessel-while in another sense they are not; but a portion of
a heterogeneous part, such as face, in no sense has the same designation
as the whole. 

The first question to be asked is what are the causes to which these
homogeneous parts owe their existence? The causes are various; and
this whether the parts be solid or fluid. Thus one set of homogeneous
parts represent the material out of which the heterogeneous parts
are formed; for each separate organ is constructed of bones, sinews,
flesh, and the like; which are either essential elements in its formation,
or contribute to the proper discharge of its function. A second set
are the nutriment of the first, and are invariably fluid, for all
growth occurs at the expense of fluid matter; while a third set are
the residue of the second. Such, for instance, are the faeces and,
in animals that have a bladder, the urine; the former being the dregs
of the solid nutriment, the latter of the fluid. 

Even the individual homogeneous parts present variations, which are
intended in each case to render them more serviceable for their purpose.
The variations of the blood may be selected to illustrate this. For
different bloods differ in their degrees of thinness or thickness,
of clearness or turbidity, of coldness or heat; and this whether we
compare the bloods from different parts of the same individual or
the bloods of different animals. For, in the individual, all the differences
just enumerated distinguish the blood of the upper and of the lower
halves of the body; and, dealing with classes, one section of animals
is sanguineous, while the other has no blood, but only something resembling
it in its place. As regards the results of such differences, the thicker
and the hotter blood is, the more conducive is it to strength, while
in proportion to its thinness and its coldness is its suitability
for sensation and intelligence. A like distinction exists also in
the fluid which is analogous to blood. This explains how it is that
bees and other similar creatures are of a more intelligent nature
than many sanguineous animals; and that, of sanguineous animals, those
are the most intelligent whose blood is thin and cold. Noblest of
all are those whose blood is hot, and at the same time thin and clear.
For such are suited alike for the development of courage and of intelligence.
Accordingly, the upper parts are superior in these respects to the
lower, the male superior to the female, and the right side to the
left. As with the blood so also with the other parts, homogeneous
and heterogeneous alike. For here also such variations as occur must
be held either to be related to the essential constitution and mode
of life of the several animals, or, in other cases, to be merely matters
of slightly better or slightly worse. Two animals, for instance, may
have eyes. But in one these eyes may be of fluid consistency, while
in the other they are hard; and in one there may be eyelids, in the
other no such appendages. In such a case, the fluid consistency and
the presence of eyelids, which are intended to add to the accuracy
of vision, are differences of degree. As to why all animals must of
necessity have blood or something of a similar character, and what
the nature of blood may be, these are matters which can only be considered
when we have first discussed hot and cold. For the natural properties
of many substances are referable to these two elementary principles;
and it is a matter of frequent dispute what animals or what parts
of animals are hot and what cold. For some maintain that water animals
are hotter than such as live on land, asserting that their natural
heat counterbalances the coldness of their medium; and again, that
bloodless animals are hotter than those with blood, and females than
males. Parmenides, for instance, and some others declare that women
are hotter than men, and that it is the warmth and abundance of their
blood which causes their menstrual flow, while Empedocles maintains
the opposite opinion. Again, comparing the blood and the bile, some
speak of the former as hot and of the latter as cold, while others
invert the description. If there be this endless disputing about hot
and cold, which of all things that affect our senses are the most
distinct, what are we to think as to our other sensory impressions?

The explanation of the difficulty appears to be that the term 'hotter'
is used in several senses; so that different statements, though in
verbal contradiction with each other, may yet all be more or less
true. There ought, then, to be some clear understanding as to the
sense in which natural substances are to be termed hot or cold, solid
or fluid. For it appears manifest that these are properties on which
even life and death are largely dependent, and that they are moreover
the causes of sleep and waking, of maturity and old age, of health
and disease; while no similar influence belongs to roughness and smoothness,
to heaviness and lightness, nor, in short, to any other such properties
of matter. That this should be so is but in accordance with rational
expectation. For hot and cold, solid and fluid, as was stated in a
former treatise, are the foundations of the physical elements.

Is then the term hot used in one sense or in many? To answer this
we must ascertain what special effect is attributed to a hotter substance,
and if there be several such, how many these may be. A body then is
in one sense said to be hotter than another, if it impart a greater
amount of heat to an object in contact with it. In a second sense,
that is said to be hotter which causes the keener sensation when touched,
and especially if the sensation be attended with pain. This criterion,
however, would seem sometimes to be a false one; for occasionally
it is the idiosyncrasy of the individual that causes the sensation
to be painful. Again, of two things, that is the hotter which the
more readily melts a fusible substance, or sets on fire an inflammable
one. Again, of two masses of one and the same substance, the larger
is said to have more heat than the smaller. Again, of two bodies,
that is said to be the hotter which takes the longer time in cooling,
as also we call that which is rapidly heated hotter than that which
is long about it; as though the rapidity implied proximity and this
again similarity of nature, while the want of rapidity implied distance
and this again dissimilarity of nature. The term hotter is used then
in all the various senses that have been mentioned, and perhaps in
still more. Now it is impossible for one body to be hotter than another
in all these different fashions. Boiling water for instance, though
it is more scalding than flame, yet has no power of burning or melting
combustible or fusible matter, while flame has. So again this boiling
water is hotter than a small fire, and yet gets cold more rapidly
and completely. For in fact fire never becomes cold; whereas water
invariably does so. Boiling water, again, is hotter to the touch than
oil; yet it gets cold and solid more rapidly than this other fluid.
Blood, again, is hotter to the touch than either water or oil, and
yet coagulates before them. Iron, again, and stones and other similar
bodies are longer in getting heated than water, but when once heated
burn other substances with a much greater intensity. Another distinction
is this. In some of the bodies which are called hot the heat is derived
from without, while in others it belongs to the bodies themselves;
and it makes a most important difference whether the heat has the
former or the latter origin. For to call that one of two bodies the
hotter, which is possessed of heat, we may almost say, accidentally
and not of its own essence, is very much the same thing as if, finding
that some man in a fever was a musician, one were to say that musicians
are hotter than healthy men. Of that which is hot per se and that
which is hot per accidens, the former is the slower to cool, while
not rarely the latter is the hotter to the touch. The former again
is the more burning of the two-flame, for instance, as compared with
boiling water-while the latter, as the boiling water, which is hot
per accidens, is the more heating to the touch. From all this it is
clear that it is no simple matter to decide which of two bodies is
the hotter. For the first may be the hotter in one sense, the second
the hotter in another. Indeed in some of these cases it is impossible
to say simply even whether a thing is hot or not. For the actual substratum
may not itself be hot, but may be hot when coupled witb heat as an
attribute, as would be the case if one attached a single name to hot
water or hot iron. It is after this manner that blood is hot. In such
cases, in those, that is, in which the substratum owes its heat to
an external influence, it is plain that cold is not a mere privation,
but an actual existence. 

There is no knowing but that even fire may be another of these cases.
For the substratum of fire may be smoke or charcoal, and though the
former of these is always hot, smoke being an uprising vapour, yet
the latter becomes cold when its flame is extinguished, as also would
oil and pinewood under similar circumstances. But even substances
that have been burnt nearly all possess some heat, cinders, for example,
and ashes, the dejections also of animals, and, among the excretions,
bile; because some residue of heat has been left in them after their
combustion. It is in another sense that pinewood and fat substances
are hot; namely, because they rapidly assume the actuality of fire.

Heat appears to cause both coagulation and melting. Now such things
as are formed merely of water are solidified by cold, while such as
are formed of nothing but earth are solidified by fire. Hot substances
again are solidified by cold, and, when they consist chiefly of earth,
the process of solidification is rapid, and the resulting substance
is insoluble; but, when their main constituent is water, the solid
matter is again soluble. What kinds of substances, however, admit
of being solidified, and what are the causes of solidification, are
questions that have already been dealt with more precisely in another
treatise. 

In conclusion, then, seeing that the terms hot and hotter are used
in many different senses, and that no one substance can be hotter
than others in all these senses, we must, when we attribute this character
to an object, add such further statements as that this substance is
hotter per se, though that other is often hotter per accidens; or
again, that this substance is potentially hot, that other actually
so; or again, that this substance is hotter in the sense of causing
a greater feeling of heat when touched, while that other is hotter
in the sense of producing flame and burning. The term hot being used
in all these various senses, it plainly follows that the term cold
will also be used with like ambiguity. 

So much then as to the signification of the terms hot and cold, hotter
and colder. 

Part 3

In natural sequence we have next to treat of solid and fluid. These
terms are used in various senses. Sometimes, for instance, they denote
things that are potentially, at other times things that are actually,
solid or fluid. Ice for example, or any other solidified fluid, is
spoken of as being actually and accidentally solid, while potentially
and essentially it is fluid. Similarly earth and ashes and the like,
when mixed with water, are actually and accidentally fluid, but potentially
and essentially are solid. Now separate the constituents in such a
mixture and you have on the one hand the watery components to which
its fluidity was due, and these are both actually and potentially
fluid, and on the other hand the earthy components, and these are
in every way solid; and it is to bodies that are solid in this complete
manner that the term 'solid' is most properly and absolutely applicable.
So also the opposite term 'fluld' is strictly and absolutely applicable
to that only which is both potentially and actually fluid. The same
remark applies also to hot bodies and to cold. 

These distinctions, then, being laid down, it is plain that blood
is essentially hot in so far as that heat is connoted in its name;
just as if boiling water were denoted by a single term, boiling would
be connoted in that term. But the substratum of blood, that which
it is in substance while it is blood in form, is not hot. Blood then
in a certain sense is essentially hot, and in another sense is not
so. For heat is included in the definition of blood, just as whiteness
is included in the definition of a white man, and so far therefore
blood is essentially hot. But so far as blood becomes hot from some
external influence, it is not hot essentially. 

As with hot and cold, so also is it with solid and fluid. We can therefore
understand how some substances are hot and fluid so long as they remain
in the living body, but become perceptibly cold and coagulate so soon
as they are separated from it; while others are hot and consistent
while in the body, but when withdrawn under a change to the opposite
condition, and become cold and fluid. Of the former blood is an example,
of the latter bile; for while blood solidifies when thus separated,
yellow bile under the same circumstances becomes more fluid. We must
attribute to such substances the possession of opposite properties
in a greater or less degree. 

In what sense, then, the blood is hot and in what sense fluid, and
how far it partakes of the opposite properties, has now been fairly
explained. Now since everything that grows must take nourishment,
and nutriment in all cases consists of fluid and solid substances,
and since it is by the force of heat that these are concocted and
changed, it follows that all living things, animals and plants alike,
must on this account, if on no other, have a natural source of heat.
This natural heat, moreover, must belong to many parts, seeing that
the organs by which the various elaborations of the food are effected
are many in number. For first of all there is the mouth and the parts
inside the mouth, on which the first share in the duty clearly devolves,
in such animals at least as live on food which requires disintegration.
The mouth, however, does not actually concoct the food, but merely
facilitates concoction; for the subdivision of the food into small
bits facilitates the action of heat upon it. After the mouth come
the upper and the lower abdominal cavities, and here it is that concoction
is effected by the aid of natural heat. Again, just as there is a
channel for the admission of the unconcocted food into the stomach,
namely the mouth, and in some animals the so-called oesophagus, which
is continuous with the mouth and reaches to the stomach, so must there
also be other and more numerous channels by which the concocted food
or nutriment shall pass out of the stomach and intestines into the
body at large, and to which these cavities shall serve as a kind of
manger. For plants get their food from the earth by means of their
roots; and this food is already elaborated when taken in, which is
the reason why plants produce no excrement, the earth and its heat
serving them in the stead of a stomach. But animals, with scarcely
an exception, and conspicuously all such as are capable of locomotion,
are provided with a stomachal sac, which is as it were an internal
substitute for the earth. They must therefore have some instrument
which shall correspond to the roots of plants, with which they may
absorb their food from this sac, so that the proper end of the successive
stages of concoction may at last be attained. The mouth then, its
duty done, passes over the food to the stomach, and there must necessarily
be something to receive it in turn from this. This something is furnished
by the bloodvessels, which run throughout the whole extent of the
mesentery from its lowest part right up to the stomach. A description
of these will be found in the treatises on Anatomy and Natural History.
Now as there is a receptacle for the entire matter taken as food,
and also a receptacle for its excremental residue, and again a third
receptacle, namely the vessels, which serve as such for the blood,
it is plain that this blood must be the final nutritive material in
such animals as have it; while in bloodless animals the same is the
case with the fluid which represents the blood. This explains why
the blood diminishes in quantity when no food is taken, and increases
when much is consumed, and also why it becomes healthy and unhealthy
according as the food is of the one or the other character. These
facts, then, and others of a like kind, make it plain that the purpose
of the blood in sanguineous animals is to subserve the nutrition of
the body. They also explain why no more sensation is produced by touching
the blood than by touching one of the excretions or the food, whereas
when the flesh is touched sensation is produced. For the blood is
not continuous nor united by growth with the flesh, but simply lies
loose in its receptacle, that is in the heart and vessels. The manner
in which the parts grow at the expense of the blood, and indeed the
whole question of nutrition, will find a more suitable place for exposition
in the treatise on Generation, and in other writings. For our present
purpose all that need be said is that the blood exists for the sake
of nutrition, that is the nutrition of the parts; and with this much
let us therefore content ourselves. 

Part 4

What are called fibres are found in the blood of some animals but
not of all. There are none, for instance, in the blood of deer and
of roes; and for this reason the blood of such animals as these never
coagulates. For one part of the blood consists mainly of water and
therefore does not coagulate, this process occurring only in the other
and earthy constituent, that is to say in the fibres, while the fluid
part is evaporating. 

Some at any rate of the animals with watery blood have a keener intellect
than those whose blood is of an earthier nature. This is due not to
the coldness of their blood, but rather to its thinness and purity;
neither of which qualities belongs to the earthy matter. For the thinner
and purer its fluid is, the more easily affected is an animal's sensibility.
Thus it is that some bloodless animals, notwithstanding their want
of blood, are yet more intelligent than some among the sanguineous
kinds. Such for instance, as already said, is the case with the bee
and the tribe of ants, and whatever other animals there may be of
a like nature. At the same time too great an excess of water makes
animals timorous. For fear chills the body; so that in animals whose
heart contains so watery a mixture the way is prepared for the operation
of this emotion. For water is congealed by cold. This also explains
why bloodless animals are, as a general rule, more timorous than such
as have blood, so that they remain motionless, when frightened, and
discharge their excretions, and in some instances change colour. Such
animals, on the other hand, as have thick and abundant fibres in their
blood are of a more earthy nature, and of a choleric temperament,
and liable to bursts of passion. For anger is productive of heat;
and solids, when they have been made hot, give off more heat than
fluids. The fibres therefore, being earthy and solid, are turned into
so many hot embers in the blood, like the embers in a vapour-bath,
and cause ebullition in the fits of passion. 

This explains why bulls and boars are so choleric and so passionate.
For their blood is exceedingly rich in fibres, and the bull's at any
rate coagulates more rapidly than that of any other animal. If these
fibres, that is to say if the earthy constituents of which we are
speaking, are taken out of the blood, the fluid that remains behind
will no longer coagulate; just as the watery residue of mud will not
coagulate after removal of the earth. But if the fibres are left the
fluid coagulates, as also does mud, under the influence of cold. For
when the heat is expelled by the cold, the fluid, as has been already
stated, passes off with it by evaporation, and the residue is dried
up and solidified, not by heat but by cold. So long, however, as the
blood is in the body, it is kept fluid by animal heat. 

The character of the blood affects both the temperament and the sensory
faculties of animals in many ways. This is indeed what might reasonably
be expected, seeing that the blood is the material of which the whole
body is made. For nutriment supplies the material, and the blood is
the ultimate nutriment. It makes then a considerable difference whether
the blood be hot or cold, thin or thick, turbid or clear.

The watery part of the blood is serum; and it is watery, either owing
to its not being yet concocted, or owing to its having become corrupted;
so that one part of the serum is the resultant of a necessary process,
while another part is material intended to serve for the formation
of the blood. 

Part 5

The differences between lard and suet correspond to differences of
blood. For both are blood concocted into these forms as a result of
abundant nutrition, being that surplus blood that is not expended
on the fleshy part of the body, and is of an easily concocted and
fatty character. This is shown by the unctuous aspect of these substances;
for such unctuous aspect in fluids is due to a combination of air
and fire. It follows from what has been said that no non-sanguineous
animals have either lard or suet; for they have no blood. Among sanguineous
animals those whose blood is dense have suet rather than lard. For
suet is of an earthy nature, that is to say, it contains but a small
proportion of water and is chiefly composed of earth; and this it
is that makes it coagulate, just as the fibrous matter of blood coagulates,
or broths which contain such fibrous matter. Thus it is that in those
horned animals that have no front teeth in the upper jaw the fat consists
of suet. For the very fact that they have horns and huckle-bones shows
that their composition is rich in this earthy element; for all such
appurtenances are solid and earthy in character. On the other hand
in those hornless animals that have front teeth in both jaws, and
whose feet are divided into toes, there is no suet, but in its place
lard; and this, not being of an earthy character, neither coagulates
nor dries up into a friable mass. 

Both lard and suet when present in moderate amount are beneficial;
for they contribute to health and strength, while they are no hindrance
to sensation. But when they are present in great excess, they are
injurious and destructive. For were the whole body formed of them
it would perish. For an animal is an animal in virtue of its sensory
part, that is in virtue of its flesh, or of the substance analogous
to flesh. But the blood, as before stated, is not sensitive; as therefore
is neither lard nor suet, seeing that they are nothing but concocted
blood. Were then the whole body composed of these substances, it would
be utterly without sensation. Such animals, again, as are excessively
fat age rapidly. For so much of their blood is used in forming fat,
that they have but little left; and when there is but little blood
the way is already open for decay. For decay may be said to be deficiency
of blood, the scantiness of which renders it liable, like all bodies
of small bulk, to be injuriously affected by any chance excess of
heat or cold. For the same reason fat animals are less prolific than
others. For that part of the blood which should go to form semen and
seed is used up in the production of lard and suet, which are nothing
but concocted blood; so that in these animals there is either no reproductive
excretion at all, or only a scanty amount. 

Part 6

So much then of blood and serum, and of lard and suet. Each of these
has been described, and the purposes told for which they severally
exist. The marrow also is of the nature of blood, and not, as some
think, the germinal force of the semen. That this is the case is quite
evident in very young animals. For in the embryo the marrow of the
bones has a blood-like appearance, which is but natural, seeing that
the parts are all constructed out of blood, and that it is on blood
that the embryo is nourished. But, as the young animal grows up and
ripens into maturity, the marrow changes its colour, just as do the
external parts and the viscera. For the viscera also in animals, so
long as they are young, have each and all a blood-like look, owing
to the large amount of this fluid which they contain. 

The consistency of the marrow agrees with that of the fat. For when
the fat consists of lard, then the marrow also is unctuous and lard-like;
but when the blood is converted by concoction into suet, and does
not assume the form of lard, then the marrow also has a suety character.
In those animals, therefore, that have horns and are without upper
front teeth, the marrow has the character of suet; while it takes
the form of lard in those that have front teeth in both jaws, and
that also have the foot divided into toes. What has ben said hardly
applies to the spinal marrow. For it is necessary that this shall
be continuous and extend without break through the whole backbone,
inasmuch as this bone consists of separate vertebrae. But were the
spinal marrow either of unctuous fat or of suet, it could not hold
together in such a continuous mass as it does, but would either be
too fluid or too frangible. 

There are some animals that can hardly be said to have any marrow.
These are those whose bones are strong and solid, as is the case with
the lion. For in this animal the marrow is so utterly insignificant
that the bones look as though they had none at all. However, as it
is necessary that animals shall have bones or something analogous
to them, such as the fish-spines of water-animals, it is also a matter
of necessity that some of these bones shall contain marrow; for the
substance contained within the bones is the nutriment out of which
these are formed. Now the universal nutriment, as already stated,
is blood; and the blood within the bone, owing to the heat which is
developed in it from its being thus surrounded, undergoes concoction,
and self-concocted blood is suet or lard; so that it is perfectly
intelligible how the marrow within the bone comes to have the character
of these substances. So also it is easy to understand why, in those
animals that have strong and compact bones, some of these should be
entirely void of marrow, while the rest contain but little of it;
for here the nutriment is spent in forming the bones. 

Those animals that have fish-spines in place of bones have no other
marrow than that of the chine. For in the first place they have naturally
but a small amount of blood; and secondly the only hollow fish-spine
is that of the chine. In this then marrow is formed; this being the
only spine in which there is space for it, and, moreover, being the
only one which owing to its division into parts requires a connecting
bond. This too is the reason why the marrow of the chine, as already
mentioned, is somewhat different from that of other bones. For, having
to act the part of a clasp, it must be of glutinous character, and
at the same time sinewy so as to admit of stretching. 

Such then are the reasons for the existence of marrow, in those animals
that have any, and such its nature. It is evidently the surplus of
the sanguineous nutriment apportioned to the bones and fish-spines,
which has undergone concoction owing to its being enclosed within
them. 

Part 7

From the marrow we pass on in natural sequence to the brain. For there
are many who think that the brain itself consists of marrow, and that
it forms the commencement of that substance, because they see that
the spinal marrow is continuous with it. In reality the two may be
said to be utterly opposite to each other in character. For of all
the parts of the body there is none so cold as the brain; whereas
the marrow is of a hot nature, as is plainly shown by its fat and
unctuous character. Indeed this is the very reason why the brain and
spinal marrow are continuous with each other. For, wherever the action
of any part is in excess, nature so contrives as to set by it another
part with an excess of contrary action, so that the excesses of the
two may counterbalance each other. Now that the marrow is hot is clearly
shown by many indications. The coldness of the brain is also manifest
enough. For in the first place it is cold even to the touch; and,
secondly, of all the fluid parts of the body it is the driest and
the one that has the least blood; for in fact it has no blood at all
in its proper substance. This brain is not residual matter, nor yet
is it one of the parts which are anatomically continuous with each
other; but it has a character peculiar to itself, as might indeed
be expected. That it has no continuity with the organs of sense is
plain from simple inspection, and is still more clearly shown by the
fact, that, when it is touched, no sensation is produced; in which
respect it resembles the blood of animals and their excrement. The
purpose of its presence in animals is no less than the preservation
of the whole body. For some writers assert that the soul is fire or
some such force. This, however, is but a rough and inaccurate assertion;
and it would perhaps be better to say that the soul is incorporate
in some substance of a fiery character. The reason for this being
so is that of all substances there is none so suitable for ministering
to the operations of the soul as that which is possessed of heat.
For nutrition and the imparting of motion are offices of the soul,
and it is by heat that these are most readily effected. To say then
that the soul is fire is much the same thing as to confound the auger
or the saw with the carpenter or his craft, simply because the work
is wrought by the two in conjunction. So far then this much is plain,
that all animals must necessarily have a certain amount of heat. But
as all influences require to be counterbalanced, so that they may
be reduced to moderation and brought to the mean (for in the mean,
and not in either extreme, lies the true and rational position), nature
has contrived the brain as a counterpoise to the region of the heart
with its contained heat, and has given it to animals to moderate the
latter, combining in it the properties of earth and water. For this
reason it is, that every sanguineous animal has a brain; whereas no
bloodless creature has such an organ, unless indeed it be, as the
Poulp, by analogy. For where there is no blood, there in consequence
there is but little heat. The brain, then, tempers the heat and seething
of the heart. In order, however, that it may not itself be absolutely
without heat, but may have a moderate amount, branches run from both
blood-vessels, that is to say from the great vessel and from what
is called the aorta, and end in the membrane which surrounds the brain;
while at the same time, in order to prevent any injury from the heat,
these encompassing vessels, instead of being few and large, are numerous
and small, and their blood scanty and clear, instead of being abundant
and thick. We can now understand why defluxions have their origin
in the head, and occur whenever the parts about the brain have more
than a due proportion of coldness. For when the nutriment steams upwards
through the blood-vessels, its refuse portion is chilled by the influence
of this region, and forms defluxions of phlegm and serum. We must
suppose, to compare small things with great, that the like happens
here as occurs in the production of showers. For when vapour steams
up from the earth and is carried by the heat into the upper regions,
so soon as it reaches the cold air that is above the earth, it condenses
again into water owing to the refrigeration, and falls back to the
earth as rain. These, however, are matters which may be suitably considered
in the Principles of Diseases, so far as natural philosophy has anything
to say to them. 

It is the brain again-or, in animals that have no brain, the part
analogous to it-which is the cause of sleep. For either by chilling
the blood that streams upwards after food, or by some other similar
influences, it produces heaviness in the region in which it lies (which
is the reason why drowsy persons hang the head), and causes the heat
to escape downwards in company with the blood. It is the accumulation
of this in excess in the lower region that produces complete sleep,
taking away the power of standing upright from those animals to whom
that posture is natural, and from the rest the power of holding up
the head. These, however, are matters which have been separately considered
in the treatises on Sensation and on Sleep. 

That the brain is a compound of earth and water is shown by what occurs
when it is boiled. For, when so treated, it turns hard and solid,
inasmuch as the water is evaporated by the heat, and leaves the earthy
part behind. Just the same occurs when pulse and other fruits are
boiled. For these also are hardened by the process, because the water
which enters into their composition is driven off and leaves the earth,
which is their main constituent, behind. 

Of all animals, man has the largest brain in proportion to his size;
and it is larger in men than in women. This is because the region
of the heart and of the lung is hotter and richer in blood in man
than in any other animal; and in men than in women. This again explains
why man, alone of animals, stands erect. For the heat, overcoming
any opposite inclination, makes growth take its own line of direction,
which is from the centre of the body upwards. It is then as a counterpoise
to his excessive heat that in man's brain there is this superabundant
fluidity and coldness; and it is again owing to this superabundance
that the cranial bone, which some call the Bregma, is the last to
become solidified; so long does evaporation continue to occur through
it under the influence of heat. Man is the only sanguineous animal
in which this takes place. Man, again, has more sutures in his skull
than any other animal, and the male more than the female. The explanation
is again to be found in the greater size of the brain, which demands
free ventilation, proportionate to its bulk. For if the brain be either
too fluid or too solid, it will not perform its office, but in the
one case will freeze the blood, and in the other will not cool it
at all; and thus will cause disease, madness, and death. For the cardiac
heat and the centre of life is most delicate in its sympathies, and
is immediately sensitive to the slightest change or affection of the
blood on the outer surface of the brain. 

The fluids which are present in the animal body at the time of birth
have now nearly all been considered. Amongst those that appear only
at a later period are the residua of the food, which include the deposits
of the belly and also those of the bladder. Besides these there is
the semen and the milk, one or the other of which makes its appearance
in appropriate animals. Of these fluids the excremental residua of
the food may be suitably discussed by themselves, when we come to
examine and consider the subject of nutrition. Then will be the time
to explain in what animals they are found, and what are the reasons
for their presence. Similarly all questions concerning the semen and
the milk may be dealt with in the treatise on Generation, for the
former of these fluids is the very starting-point of the generative
process, and the latter has no other ground of existence than generative
purposes. 

Part 8

We have now to consider the remaining homogeneous parts, and will
begin with flesh, and with the substance that, in animals that have
no flesh, takes its place. The reason for so beginning is that flesh
forms the very basis of animals, and is the essential constituent
of their body. Its right to this precedence can also be demonstrated
logically. For an animal is by our definition something that has sensibility
and chief of all the primary sensibility, which is that of Touch;
and it is the flesh, or analogous substance, which is the organ of
this sense. And it is the organ, either in the same way as the pupil
is the organ of sight, that is it constitutes the primary organ of
the sense; or it is the organ and the medium through which the object
acts combined, that is it answers to the pupil with the whole transparent
medium attached to it. Now in the case of the other senses it was
impossible for nature to unite the medium with the sense-organ, nor
would such a junction have served any purpose; but in the case of
touch she was compelled by necessity to do so. For of all the sense-organs
that of touch is the only one that has corporeal substance, or at
any rate it is more corporeal than any other, and its medium must
be corporeal like itself. 

It is obvious also to sense that it is for the sake of the flesh that
all the other parts exist. By the other parts I mean the bones, the
skin, the sinews, and the blood-vessels, and, again, the hair and
the various kinds of nails, and anything else there may be of a like
character. Thus the bones are a contrivance to give security to the
soft parts, to which purpose they are adapted by their hardness; and
in animals that have no bones the same office is fulfilled by some
analogous substance, as by fishspine in some fishes, and by cartilage
in others. 

Now in some animals this supporting substance is situated within the
body, while in some of the bloodless species it is placed on the outside.
The latter is the case in all the Crustacea, as the Carcini (Crabs)
and the Carabi (Prickly Lobsters); it is the case also in the Testacea,
as for instance in the several species known by the general name of
oysters. For in all these animals the fleshy substance is within,
and the earthy matter, which holds the soft parts together and keeps
them from injury, is on the outside. For the shell not only enables
the soft parts to hold together, but also, as the animal is bloodless
and so has but little natural warmth, surrounds it, as a chaufferette
does the embers, and keeps in the smouldering heat. Similar to this
seems to be the arrangement in another and distinct tribe of animals,
namely the Tortoises, including the Chelone and the several kinds
of Emys. But in Insects and in Cephalopods the plan is entirely different,
there being moreover a contrast between these two themselves. For
in neither of these does there appear to be any bony or earthy part,
worthy of notice, distinctly separated from the rest of the body.
Thus in the Cephalopods the main bulk of the body consists of a soft
flesh-like substance, or rather of a substance which is intermediate
to flesh and sinew, so as not to be so readily destructible as actual
flesh. I call this substance intermediate to flesh and sinew, because
it is soft like the former, while it admits of stretching like the
latter. Its cleavage, however, is such that it splits not longitudinally,
like sinew, but into circular segments, this being the most advantageous
condition, so far as strength is concerned. These animals have also
a part inside them corresponding to the spinous bones of fishes. For
instance, in the Cuttle-fishes there is what is known as the os sepiae,
and in the Calamaries there is the so-called gladius. In the Poulps,
on the other hand, there is no such internal part, because the body,
or, as it is termed in them, the head, forms but a short sac, whereas
it is of considerable length in the other two; and it was this length
which led nature to assign to them their hard support, so as to ensure
their straightness and inflexibility; just as she has assigned to
sanguineous animals their bones or their fish-spines, as the case
may be. To come now to Insects. In these the arrangement is quite
different from that of the Cephalopods; quite different also from
that which obtains in sanguineous animals, as indeed has been already
stated. For in an insect there is no distinction into soft and hard
parts, but the whole body is hard, the hardness, however, being of
such a character as to be more flesh-like than bone, and more earthy
and bone-like than flesh. The purpose of this is to make the body
of the insect less liable to get broken into pieces. 

Part 9

There is a resemblance between the osseous and the vascular systems;
for each has a central part in which it begins, and each forms a continuous
whole. For no bone in the body exists as a separate thing in itself,
but each is either a portion of what may be considered a continuous
whole, or at any rate is linked with the rest by contact and by attachments;
so that nature may use adjoining bones either as though they were
actually continuous and formed a single bone, or, for purposes of
flexure, as though they were two and distinct. And similarly no blood-vessel
has in itself a separate individuality; but they all form parts of
one whole. For an isolated bone, if such there were, would in the
first place be unable to perform the office for the sake of which
bones exist; for, were it discontinuous and separated from the rest
by a gap, it would be perfectly unable to produce either flexure or
extension; nor only so, but it would actually be injurious, acting
like a thorn or an arrow lodged in the flesh. Similarly if a vessel
were isolated, and not continuous with the vascular centre, it would
be unable to retain the blood within it in a proper state. For it
is the warmth derived from this centre that hinders the blood from
coagulating; indeed the blood, when withdrawn from its influence,
becomes manifestly putrid. Now the centre or origin of the blood-vessels
is the heart, and the centre or origin of the bones, in all animals
that have bones, is what is called the chine. With this all the other
bones of the body are in continuity; for it is the chine that holds
together the whole length of an animal and preserves its straightness.
But since it is necessary that the body of an animal shall bend during
locomotion, this chine, while it is one in virtue of the continuity
of its parts, yet its division into vertebrae is made to consist of
many segments. It is from this chine that the bones of the limbs,
in such animals as have these parts, proceed, and with it they are
continuous, being fastened together by the sinews where the limbs
admit of flexure, and having their extremities adapted to each other,
either by the one being hollowed and the other rounded, or by both
being hollowed and including between them a hucklebone, as a connecting
bolt, so as to allow of flexure and extension. For without some such
arrangement these movements would be utterly impossible, or at any
rate would be performed with great difficulty. There are some joints,
again, in which the lower end of the one bone and the upper end of
the other are alike in shape. In these cases the bones are bound together
by sinews, and cartilaginous pieces are interposed in the joint, to
serve as a kind of padding, and prevent the two extremities from grating
against each other. 

Round about the bones, and attached to them by thin fibrous bands,
grow the fleshy parts, for the sake of which the bones themselves
exist. For just as an artist, when he is moulding an animal out of
clay or other soft substance, takes first some solid body as a basis,
and round this moulds the clay, so also has nature acted in fashioning
the animal body out of flesh. Thus we find all the fleshy parts, with
one exception, supported by bones, which serve, when the parts are
organs of motion, to facilitate flexure, and, when the parts are motionless,
act as a protection. The ribs, for example, which enclose the chest
are intended to ensure the safety of the heart and neighbouring viscera.
The exception of which mention was made is the belly. The walls of
this are in all animals devoid of bones; in order that there may be
no hindrance to the expansion which necessarily occurs in this part
after a meal, nor, in females, any interference with the growth of
the foetus, which is lodged here. 

Now the bones of viviparous animals, of such, that is, as are not
merely externally but also internally viviparous, vary but very little
from each other in point of strength, which in all of them is considerable.
For the Vivipara in their bodily proportions are far above other animals,
and many of them occasionally grow to an enormous size, as is the
case in Libya and in hot and dry countries generally. But the greater
the bulk of an animal, the stronger, the bigger, and the harder, are
the supports which it requires; and comparing the big animals with
each other, this requirement will be most marked in those that live
a life of rapine. Thus it is that the bones of males are harder than
those of females; and the bones of flesh-eaters, that get their food
by fighting, are harder than those of Herbivora. Of this the Lion
is an example; for so hard are its bones, that, when struck, they
give off sparks, as though they were stones. It may be mentioned also
that the Dolphin, in as much as it is viviparous, is provided with
bones and not with fish-spines. 

In those sanguineous animals, on the other hand, that are oviparous,
the bones present successive slight variations of character. Thus
in Birds there are bones, but these are not so strong as the bones
of the Vivipara. Then come the Oviparous fishes, where there is no
bone, but merely fish-spine. In the Serpents too the bones have the
character of fish-spine, excepting in the very large species, where
the solid foundation of the body requires to be stronger, in order
that the animal itself may be strong, the same reason prevailing as
in the case of the Vivipara. Lastly, in the Selachia, as they are
called, the fish-spines are replaced by cartilage. For it is necessary
that the movements of these animals shall be of an undulating character;
and this again requires the framework that supports the body to be
made of a pliable and not of a brittle substance. Moreover, in these
Selachia nature has used all the earthy matter on the skin; and she
is unable to allot to many different parts one and the same superfluity
of material. Even in viviparous animals many of the bones are cartilaginous.
This happens in those parts where it is to the advantage of the surrounding
flesh that its solid base shall be soft and mucilaginous. Such, for
instance, is the case with the ears and nostrils; for in projecting
parts, such as these, brittle substances would soon get broken. Cartilage
and bone are indeed fundamentally the same thing, the differences
between them being merely matters of degree. Thus neither cartilage
nor bone, when once cut off, grows again. Now the cartilages of these
land animals are without marrow, that is without any distinctly separate
marrow. For the marrow, which in bones is distinctly separate, is
here mixed up with the whole mass, and gives a soft and mucilaginous
consistence to the cartilage. But in the Selachia the chine, though
it is cartilaginous, yet contains marrow; for here it stands in the
stead of a bone. 

Very nearly resembling the bones to the touch are such parts as nails,
hoofs, whether solid or cloven, horns, and the beaks of birds, all
of which are intended to serve as means of defence. For the organs
which are made out of these substances, and which are called by the
same names as the substances themselves, the organ hoof, for instance,
and the organ horn, are contrivances to ensure the preservation of
the animals to which they severally belong. In this class too must
be reckoned the teeth, which in some animals have but a single function,
namely the mastication of the food, while in others they have an additional
office, namely to serve as weapons; as is the case with all animals
that have sharp interfitting teeth or that have tusks. All these parts
are necessarily of solid and earthy character; for the value of a
weapon depends on such properties. Their earthy character explains
how it is that all such parts are more developed in four-footed vivipara
than in man. For there is always more earth in the composition of
these animals than in that of the human body. However, not only all
these parts but such others as are nearly connected with them, skin
for instance, bladder, membrane, hairs, feathers, and their analogues,
and any other similar parts that there may be, will be considered
farther on with the heterogeneous parts. There we shall inquire into
the causes which produce them, and into the objects of their presence
severally in the bodies of animals. For, as with the heterogeneous
parts, so with these, it is from a consideration of their functions
that alone we can derive any knowledge of them. The reason for dealing
with them at all in this part of the treatise, and classifying them
with the homogeneous parts, is that under one and the same name are
confounded the entire organs and the substances of which they are
composed. But of all these substances flesh and bone form the basis.
Semen and milk were also passed over when we were considering the
homogeneous fluids. For the treatise on Generation will afford a more
suitable place for their examination, seeing that the former of the
two is the very foundation of the thing generated, while the latter
is its nourishment. 

Part 10

Let us now make, as it were, a fresh beginning, and consider the heterogeneous
parts, taking those first which are the first in importance. For in
all animals, at least in all the perfect kinds, there are two parts
more essential than the rest, namely the part which serves for the
ingestion of food, and the part which serves for the discharge of
its residue. For without food growth and even existence is impossible.
Intervening again between these two parts there is invariably a third,
in which is lodged the vital principle. As for plants, though they
also are included by us among things that have life, yet are they
without any part for the discharge of waste residue. For the food
which they absorb from the ground is already concocted, and they give
off as its equivalent their seeds and fruits. Plants, again, inasmuch
as they are without locomotion, present no great variety in their
heterogeneous parts. For, where the functions are but few, few also
are the organs required to effect them. The configuration of plants
is a matter then for separate consideration. Animals, however, that
not only live but feel, present a greater multiformity of parts, and
this diversity is greater in some animals than in others, being most
varied in those to whose share has fallen not mere life but life of
high degree. Now such an animal is man. For of all living beings with
which we are acquainted man alone partakes of the divine, or at any
rate partakes of it in a fuller measure than the rest. For this reason,
then, and also because his external parts and their forms are more
familiar to us than those of other animals, we must speak of man first;
and this the more fitly, because in him alone do the natural parts
hold the natural position; his upper part being turned towards that
which is upper in the universe. For, of all animals, man alone stands
erect. 

In man, then, the head is destitute of flesh; this being the necessary
consequence of what has already been stated concerning the brain.
There are, indeed, some who hold that the life of man-would be longer
than it is, were his head more abundantly furnished with flesh; and
they account for the absence of this substance by saying that it is
intended to add to the perfection of sensation. For the brain they
assert to be the organ of sensation; and sensation, they say, cannot
penetrate to parts that are too thickly covered with flesh. But neither
part of this statement is true. On the contrary, were the region of
the brain thickly covered with flesh, the very purpose for which animals
are provided with a brain would be directly contravened. For the brain
would itself be heated to excess and so unable to cool any other part;
and, as to the other half of their statement, the brain cannot be
the cause of any of the sensations, seeing that it is itself as utterly
without feeling as any one of the excretions. These writers see that
certain of the senses are located in the head, and are unable to discern
the reason for this; they see also that the brain is the most peculiar
of all the animal organs; and out of these facts they form an argument,
by which they link sensation and brain together. It has, however,
already been clearly set forth in the treatise on Sensation, that
it is the region of the heart that constitutes the sensory centre.
There also it was stated that two of the senses, namely touch and
taste, are manifestly in immediate connexion with the heart; and that
as regards the other three, namely hearing, sight, and the centrally
placed sense of smell, it is the character of their sense-organs which
causes them to be lodged as a rule in the head. Vision is so placed
in all animals. But such is not invariably the case with hearing or
with smell. For fishes and the like hear and smell, and yet have no
visible organs for these senses in the head; a fact which demonstrates
the accuracy of the opinion here maintained. Now that vision, whenever
it exists, should be in the neighbourhood of the brain is but what
one would rationally expect. For the brain is fluid and cold, and
vision is of the nature of water, water being of all transparent substances
the one most easily confined. Moreover it cannot but necessarily be
that the more precise senses will have their precision rendered still
greater if ministered to by parts that have the purest blood. For
the motion of the heat of blood destroys sensory activity. For these
reasons the organs of the precise senses are lodged in the head.

It is not only the fore part of the head that is destitute of flesh,
but the hind part also. For, in all animals that have a head, it is
this head which more than any other part requires to be held up. But,
were the head heavily laden with flesh, this would be impossible;
for nothing so burdened can be held upright. This is an additional
proof that the absence of flesh from the head has no reference to
brain sensation. For there is no brain in the hinder part of the head,
and yet this is as much without flesh as is the front. 

In some animals hearing as well as vision is lodged in the region
of the head. Nor is this without a rational explanation. For what
is called the empty space is full of air, and the organ of hearing
is, as we say, of the nature of air. Now there are channels which
lead from the eyes to the blood-vessels that surround the brain; and
similarly there is a channel which leads back again from each ear
and connects it with the hinder part of the head. But no part that
is without blood is endowed with sensation, as neither is the blood
itself, but only some one of the parts that are formed of blood.

The brain in all animals that have one is placed in the front part
of the head; because the direction in which sensation acts is in front;
and because the heart, from which sensation proceeds, is in the front
part of the body; and lastly because the instruments of sensation
are the blood-containing parts, and the cavity in the posterior part
of the skull is destitute of blood-vessels. 

As to the position of the sense-organs, they have been arranged by
nature in the following well-ordered manner. The organs of hearing
are so placed as to divide the circumference of the head into two
equal halves; for they have to hear not only sounds which are directly
in line with themselves, but sounds from all quarters. The organs
of vision are placed in front, because sight is exercised only in
a straight line, and moving as we do in a forward direction it is
necessary that we should see before us, in the direction of our motion.
Lastly, the organs of smell are placed with good reason between the
eyes. For as the body consists of two parts, a right half and a left,
so also each organ of sense is double. In the case of touch this is
not apparent, the reason being that the primary organ of this sense
is not the flesh or analogous part, but lies internally. In the case
of taste, which is merely a modification of touch and which is placed
in the tongue, the fact is more apparent than in the case of touch,
but still not so manifest as in the case of the other senses. However,
even in taste it is evident enough; for in some animals the tongue
is plainly forked. The double character of the sensations is, however,
more conspicuous in the other organs of sense. For there are two ears
and two eyes, and the nostrils, though joined together, are also two.
Were these latter otherwise disposed, and separated from each other
as are the ears, neither they nor the nose in which they are placed
would be able to perform their office. For in such animals as have
nostrils olfaction is effected by means of inspiration, and the organ
of inspiration is placed in front and in the middle line. This is
the reason why nature has brought the two nostrils together and placed
them as the central of the three sense-organs, setting them side by
side on a level with each other, to avail themselves of the inspiratory
motion. In other animals than man the arrangement of these sense-organs
is also such as is adapted in each case to the special requirements.

Part 11

For instance, in quadrupeds the ears stand out freely from the head
and are set to all appearance above the eyes. Not that they are in
reality above the eyes; but they seem to be so, because the animal
does not stand erect, but has its head hung downwards. This being
the usual attitude of the animal when in motion, it is of advantage
that its ears shall be high up and movable; for by turning themselves
about they can the better take in sounds from every quarter.

Part 12

In birds, on the other hand, there are no ears, but only the auditory
passages. This is because their skin is hard and because they have
feathers instead of hairs, so that they have not got the proper material
for the formation of ears. Exactly the same is the case with such
oviparous quadrupeds as are clad with scaly plates, and the same explanation
applies to them. There is also one of the viviparous quadrupeds, namely
the seal, that has no ears but only the auditory passages. The explanation
of this is that the seal, though a quadruped, is a quadruped of stunted
formation. 

Part 13

Men, and Birds, and Quadrupeds, viviparous and oviparous alike, have
their eyes protected by lids. In the Vivipara there are two of these;
and both are used by these animals not only in closing the eyes, but
also in the act of blinking; whereas the oviparous quadrupeds, and
the heavy-bodied birds as well as some others, use only the lower
lid to close the eye; while birds blink by means of a membrane that
issues from the canthus. The reason for the eyes being thus protected
is that nature has made them of fluid consistency, in order to ensure
keenness of vision. For had they been covered with hard skin, they
would, it is true, have been less liable to get injured by anything
falling into them from without, but they would not have been sharp-sighted.
It is then to ensure keenness of vision that the skin over the pupil
is fine and delicate; while the lids are superadded as a protection
from injury. It is as a still further safeguard that all these animals
blink, and man most of all; this action (which is not performed from
deliberate intention but from a natural instinct) serving to keep
objects from falling into the eyes; and being more frequent in man
than in the rest of these animals, because of the greater delicacy
of his skin. These lids are made of a roll of skin; and it is because
they are made of skin and contain no flesh that neither they, nor
the similarly constructed prepuce, unite again when once cut.

As to the oviparous quadrupeds, and such birds as resemble them in
closing the eye with the lower lid, it is the hardness of the skin
of their heads which makes them do so. For such birds as have heavy
bodies are not made for flight; and so the materials which would otherwise
have gone to increase the growth of the feathers are diverted thence,
and used to augment the thickness of the skin. Birds therefore of
this kind close the eye with the lower lid; whereas pigeons and the
like use both upper and lower lids for the purpose. As birds are covered
with feathers, so oviparous quadrupeds are covered with scaly plates;
and these in all their forms are harder than hairs, so that the skin
also to which they belong is harder than the skin of hairy animals.
In these animals, then, the skin on the head is hard, and so does
not allow of the formation of an upper eyelid, whereas lower down
the integument is of a flesh-like character, so that the lower lid
can be thin and extensible. 

The act of blinking is performed by the heavy-bodied birds by means
of the membrane already mentioned, and not by this lower lid. For
in blinking rapid motion is required, and such is the motion of this
membrane, whereas that of the lower lid is slow. It is from the canthus
that is nearest to the nostrils that the membrane comes. For it is
better to have one starting-point for nictitation than two; and in
these birds this starting-point is the junction of eye and nostrils,
an anterior starting-point being preferable to a lateral one. Oviparous
quadrupeds do not blink in like manner as the birds; for, living as
they do on the ground, they are free from the necessity of having
eyes of fluid consistency and of keen sight, whereas these are essential
requisites for birds, inasmuch as they have to use their eyes at long
distances. This too explains why birds with talons, that have to search
for prey by eye from aloft, and therefore soar to greater heights
than other birds, are sharpsighted; while common fowls and the like,
that live on the ground and are not made for flight, have no such
keenness of vision. For there is nothing in their mode of life which
imperatively requires it. 

Fishes and Insects and the hard-skinned Crustacea present certain
differences in their eyes, but so far resemble each other as that
none of them have eyelids. As for the hard-skinned Crustacea it is
utterly out of the question that they should have any; for an eyelid,
to be of use, requires the action of the skin to be rapid. These animals
then have no eyelids and, in default of this protection, their eyes
are hard, just as though the lid were attached to the surface of the
eye, and the animal saw through it. Inasmuch, however, as such hardness
must necessarily blunt the sharpness of vision, nature has endowed
the eyes of Insects, and still more those of Crustacea, with mobility
(just as she has given some quadrupeds movable ears), in order that
they may be able to turn to the light and catch its rays, and so see
more plainly. Fishes, however, have eyes of a fluid consistency. For
animals that move much about have to use their vision at considerable
distances. If now they live on land, the air in which they move is
transparent enough. But the water in which fishes live is a hindrance
to sharp sight, though it has this advantage over the air, that it
does not contain so many objects to knock against the eyes. The risk
of collision being thus small, nature, who makes nothing in vain,
has given no eyelids to fishes, while to counterbalance the opacity
of the water she has made their eyes of fluid consistency.

Part 14

All animals that have hairs on the body have lashes on the eyelids;
but birds and animals with scale-like plates, being hairless, have
none. The Libyan ostrich, indeed, forms an exception; for, though
a bird, it is furnished with eyelashes. This exception, however, will
be explained hereafter. Of hairy animals, man alone has lashes on
both lids. For in quadrupeds there is a greater abundance of hair
on the back than on the under side of the body; whereas in man the
contrary is the case, and the hair is more abundant on the front surface
than on the back. The reason for this is that hair is intended to
serve as a protection to its possessor. Now, in quadrupeds, owing
to their inclined attitude, the under or anterior surface does not
require so much protection as the back, and is therefore left comparatively
bald, in spite of its being the nobler of the two sides. But in man,
owing to his upright attitude, the anterior and posterior surfaces
of the body are on an equality as regards need of protection. Nature
therefore has assigned the protective covering to the nobler of the
two surfaces; for invariably she brings about the best arrangement
of such as are possible. This then is the reason that there is no
lower eyelash in any quadruped; though in some a few scattered hairs
sprout out under the lower lid. This also is the reason that they
never have hair in the axillae, nor on the pubes, as man has. Their
hair, then, instead of being collected in these parts, is either thickly
set over the whole dorsal surface, as is the case for instance in
dogs, or, sometimes, forms a mane, as in horses and the like, or as
in the male lion where the mane is still more flowing and ample. So,
again, whenever there is a tail of any length, nature decks it with
hair, with long hair if the stem of the tail be short, as in horses,
with short hair if the stem be long, regard also being had to the
condition of the rest of the body. For nature invariably gives to
one part what she subtracts from another. Thus when she has covered
the general surface of an animal's body with an excess of hair, she
leaves a deficiency in the region of the tail. This, for instance,
in the case with bears. 

No animal has so much hair on the head as man. This, in the first
place, is the necessary result of the fluid character of his brain,
and of the presence of so many sutures in his skull. For wherever
there is the most fluid and the most heat, there also must necessarily
occur the greatest outgrowth. But, secondly, the thickness of the
hair in this part has a final cause, being intended to protect the
head, by preserving it from excess of either heat or cold. And as
the brain of man is larger and more fluid than that of any other animal,
it requires a proportionately greater amount of protection. For the
more fluid a substance is, the more readily does it get excessively
heated or excessively chilled, while substances of an opposite character
are less liable to such injurious affections. 

These, however, are matters which by their close connexion with eyelashes
have led us to digress from our real topic, namely the cause to which
these lashes owe their existence. We must therefore defer any further
remarks we may have to make on these matters till the proper occasion
arises and then return to their consideration. 

Part 15

Both eyebrows and eyelashes exist for the protection of the eyes;
the former that they may shelter them, like the eaves of a house,
from any fluids that trickle down from the head; the latter to act
like the palisades which are sometimes placed in front of enclosures,
and keep out any objects which might otherwise get in. The brows are
placed over the junction of two bones, which is the reason that in
old age they often become so bushy as to require cutting. The lashes
are set at the terminations of small blood-vessels. For the vessels
come to an end where the skin itself terminates; and, in all places
where these endings occur, the exudation of moisture of a corporeal
character necessitates the growth of hairs, unless there be some operation
of nature which interferes, by diverting the moisture to another purpose.

Part 16

Viviparous quadrupeds, as a rule, present no great variety of form
in the organ of smell. In those of them, however, whose jaws project
forwards and taper to a narrow end, so as to form what is called a
snout, the nostrils are placed in this projection, there being no
other available plan; while, in the rest, there is a more definite
demarcation between nostrils and jaws. But in no animal is this part
so peculiar as in the elephant, where it attains an extraordinary
and strength. For the elephant uses its nostril as a hand; this being
the instrument with which it conveys food, fluid and solid alike,
to its mouth. With it, too, it tears up trees, coiling it round their
stems. In fact it applies it generally to the purposes of a hand.
For the elephant has the double character of a land animal, and of
one that lives in swamps. Seeing then that it has to get its food
from the water, and yet must necessarily breathe, inasmuch as it is
a land animal and has blood; seeing, also, that its excessive weight
prevents it from passing rapidly from water to land, as some other
sanguineous vivipara that breathe can do, it becomes necessary that
it shall be suited alike for life in the water and for life on dry
land. just then as divers are sometimes provided with instruments
for respiration, through which they can draw air from above the water,
and thus may remain for a long time under the sea, so also have elephants
been furnished by nature with their lengthened nostril; and, whenever
they have to traverse the water, they lift this up above the surface
and breathe through it. For the elephant's proboscis, as already said,
is a nostril. Now it would have been impossible for this nostril to
have the form of a proboscis, had it been hard and incapable of bending.
For its very length would then have prevented the animal from supplying
itself with food, being as great an impediment as the of certain oxen,
that are said to be obliged to walk backwards while they are grazing.
It is therefore soft and flexible, and, being such, is made, in addition
to its own proper functions, to serve the office of the fore-feet;
nature in this following her wonted plan of using one and the same
part for several purposes. For in polydactylous quadrupeds the fore-feet
are intended not merely to support the weight of the body, but to
serve as hands. But in elephants, though they must be reckoned polydactylous,
as their foot has neither cloven nor solid hoof, the fore-feet, owing
to the great size and weight of the body, are reduced to the condition
of mere supports; and indeed their slow motion and unfitness for bending
make them useless for any other purpose. A nostril, then, is given
to the elephant for respiration, as to every other animal that has
a lung, and is lengthened out and endowed with its power of coiling
because the animal has to remain for considerable periods of time
in the water, and is unable to pass thence to dry ground with any
rapidity. But as the feet are shorn of their full office, this same
part is also, as already said, made by nature to supply their place,
and give such help as otherwise would be rendered by them.

As to other sanguineous animals, the Birds, the Serpents, and the
Oviparous quadrupeds, in all of them there are the nostril-holes,
placed in front of the mouth; but in none are there any distinctly
formed nostrils, nothing in fact which can be called nostrils except
from a functional point of view. A bird at any rate has nothing which
can properly be called a nose. For its so-called beak is a substitute
for jaws. The reason for this is to be found in the natural conformation
of birds. For they are winged bipeds; and this makes it necessary
that their heads and neck shall be of light weight; just as it makes
it necessary that their breast shall be narrow. The beak therefore
with which they are provided is formed of a bone-like substance, in
order that it may serve as a weapon as well as for nutritive purposes,
but is made of narrow dimensions to suit the small size of the head.
In this beak are placed the olfactory passages. But there are no nostrils;
for such could not possibly be placed there. 

As for those animals that have no respiration, it has already been
explained why it is that they are without nostrils, and perceive odours
either through gills, or through a blowhole, or, if they are insects,
by the hypozoma; and how the power of smelling depends, like their
motion, upon the innate spirit of their bodies, which in all of them
is implanted by nature and not introduced from without. 

Under the nostrils are the lips, in such sanguineous animals, that
is, as have teeth. For in birds, as already has been said, the purposes
of nutrition and defence are fulfilled by a bonelike beak, which forms
a compound substitute for teeth and lips. For supposing that one were
to cut off a man's lips, unite his upper teeth together, and similarly
his under ones, and then were to lengthen out the two separate pieces
thus formed, narrowing them on either side and making them project
forwards, supposing, I say, this to be done, we should at once have
a bird-like beak. 

The use of the lips in all animals except man is to preserve and guard
the teeth; and thus it is that the distinctness with which the lips
are formed is in direct proportion to the degree of nicety and perfection
with which the teeth are fashioned. In man the lips are soft and flesh-like
and capable of separating from each other. Their purpose, as in other
animals, is to guard the teeth, but they are more especially intended
to serve a higher office, contributing in common with other parts
to man's faculty of speech. For just as nature has made man's tongue
unlike that of other animals, and, in accordance with what I have
said is her not uncommon practice, has used it for two distinct operations,
namely for the perception of savours and for speech, so also has she
acted with regard to the lips, and made them serve both for speech
and for the protection of the teeth. For vocal speech consists of
combinations of the letters, and most of these would be impossible
to pronounce, were the lips not moist, nor the tongue such as it is.
For some letters are formed by closures of the lips and others by
applications of the tongue. But what are the differences presented
by these and what the nature and extent of such differences, are questions
to which answers must be sought from those who are versed in metrical
science. It was necessary that the two parts which we are discussing
should, in conformity with the requirements, be severally adapted
to fulfil the office mentioned above, and be of appropriate character.
Therefore are they made of flesh, and flesh is softer in man than
in any other animal, the reason for this being that of all animals
man has the most delicate sense of touch. 

Part 17

The tongue is placed under the vaulted roof of the mouth. In land
animals it presents but little diversity. But in other animals it
is variable, and this whethe+r we compare them as a class with such
as live on land, or compare their several species with each other.
It is in man that the tongue attains its greatest degree of freedom,
of softness, and of breadth; the object of this being to render it
suitable for its double function. For its softness fits it for the
perception of savours, a sense which is more delicate in man than
in any other animal, softness being most impressionable by touch,
of which sense taste is but a variety. This same softness again, together
with its breadth, adapts it for the articulation of letters and for
speech. For these qualities, combined with its freedom from attachment,
are those which suit it best for advancing and retiring in every direction.
That this is so is plain, if we consider the case of those who are
tongue-tied in however slight a degree. For their speech is indistinct
and lisping; that is to say there are certain letters which they cannot
pronounce. In being broad is comprised the possibility of becoming
narrow; for in the great the small is included, but not the great
in the small. 

What has been said explains why, among birds, those that are most
capable of pronouncing letters are such as have the broadest tongues;
and why the viviparous and sanguineous quadrupeds, where the tongue
is hard and thick and not free in its motions, have a very limited
vocal articulation. Some birds have a considerable variety of notes.
These are the smaller kinds. But it is the birds with talons that
have the broader tongues. All birds use their tongues to communicate
with each other. But some do this in a greater degree than the rest;
so that in some cases it even seems as though actual instruction were
imparted from one to another by its agency. These, however, are matters
which have already been discussed in the Researches concerning Animals.

As to those oviparous and sanguineous animals that live not in the
air but on the earth, their tongue in most cases is tied down and
hard, and is therefore useless for vocal purposes; in the serpents,
however, and in the lizards it is long and forked, so as to be suited
for the perception of savours. So long indeed is this part in serpents,
that though small while in the mouth it can be protruded to a great
distance. In these animals it is forked and has a fine and hair-like
extremity, because of their great liking for dainty food. For by this
arrangement they derive a twofold pleasure from savours, their gustatory
sensation being as it were doubled. 

Even some bloodless animals have an organ that serves for the perception
of savours; and in sanguineous animals such an organ is invariably
variably For even in such of these as would seem to an ordinary observer
to have nothing of the kind, some of the fishes for example, there
is a kind of shabby representative of a tongue, much like what exists
in river crocodiles. In most of these cases the apparent absence of
the part can be rationally explained on some ground or other. For
in the first place the interior of the mouth in animals of this character
is invariably spinous. Secondly, in water animals there is but short
space of time for the perception of savours, and as the use of this
sense is thus of short duration, shortened also is the separate part
which subserves it. The reason for their food being so rapidly transmitted
to the stomach is that they cannot possibly spend any time in sucking
out the juices; for were they to attempt to do so, the water would
make its way in during the process. Unless therefore one pulls their
mouth very widely open, the projection of this part is quite invisible.
The region exposed by thus opening the mouth is spinous; for it is
formed by the close apposition of the gills, which are of a spinous
character. 

In crocodiles the immobility of the lower jaw also contributes in
some measure to stunt the development of the tongue. For the crocodile's
tongue is adherent to the lower jaw. For its upper and lower jaws
are, as it were, inverted, it being the upper jaw which in other animals
is the immovable one. The tongue, however, on this animal is not attached
to the upper jaw, because that would interfere with the ingestion
of food, but adheres to the lower jaw, because this is, as it were,
the upper one which has changed its place. Moreover, it is the crocodile's
lot, though a land animal, to live the life of a fish, and this again
necessarily involves an indistinct formation of the part in question.

The roof of the mouth resembles flesh, even in many of the fishes;
and in some of the river species, as for instance in the fishes known
as Cyprini, is so very flesh-like and soft as to be taken by careless
observers for a tongue. The tongue of fishes, however, though it exists
as a separate part, is never formed with such distinctness as this,
as has been already explained. Again, as the gustatory sensibility
is intended to serve animals in the selection of food, it is not diffused
equally over the whole surface of the tongue-like organ, but is placed
chiefly in the tip; and for this reason it is the tip which is the
only part of the tongue separated in fishes from the rest of the mouth.
As all animals are sensible to the pleasure derivable from food, they
all feel a desire for it. For the object of desire is the pleasant.
The part, however, by which food produces the sensation is not precisely
alike in all of them, but while in some it is free from attachments,
in others, where it is not required for vocal pur, poses, it is adherent.
In some again it is hard, in others soft or flesh-like. Thus even
the Crustacea, the Carabi for instance and the like, and the Cephalopods,
such as the Sepias and the Poulps, have some such part inside the
mouth. As for the Insects, some of them have the part which serves
as tongue inside the mouth, as is the case with ants, and as is also
the case with many Testacea, while in others it is placed externally.
In this latter case it resembles a sting, and is hollow and spongy,
so as to serve at one and the same time for the tasting and for the
sucking up of nutriment. This is plainly to be seen in flies and bees
and all such animals, and likewise in some of the Testacea. In the
Purpurae, for instance, so strong is this part that it enables them
to bore holes through the hard covering of shell-fish, of the spiral
snails, for example, that are used as bait to catch them. So also
the gad-flies and cattle-flies can pierce through the skin of man,
and some of them even through the skins of other animals. Such, then,
in these animals is the nature of the tongue, which is thus as it
were the counterpart of the elephant's nostril. For as in the elephant
the nostril is used as a weapon, so in these animals the tongue serves
as a sting. 

In all other animals the tongue agrees with description already given.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK III

Part 1 

We have next to consider the teeth, and with these the mouth, that
is the cavity which they enclose and form. The teeth have one invariable
office, namely the reduction of food; but besides this general function
they have other special ones, and these differ in different groups.
Thus in some animals the teeth serve as weapons; but this with a distinction.
For there are offensive weapons and there are defensive weapons; and
while in some animals, as the wild Carnivora, the teeth answer both
purposes, in many others, both wild and domesticated, they serve only
for defence. In man the teeth are admirably constructed for their
general office, the front ones being sharp, so as to cut the food
into bits, and the hinder ones broad and flat, so as to grind it to
a pulp; while between these and separating them are the dog-teeth,
which, in accordance with the rule that the mean partakes of both
extremes, share in the characters of those on either side, being broad
in one part but sharp in another. Similar distinctions of shape are
presented by the teeth of other animals, with the exception of those
whose teeth are one and all of the sharp kind. In man, however, the
number and the character even of these sharp teeth have been mainly
determined by the requirements of speech. For the front teeth of man
contribute in many ways to the formation of letter-sounds.

In some animals, however, the teeth, as already said, serve merely
for the reduction of food. When, besides this, they serve as offensive
and defensive weapons, they may either be formed into tusks, as for
instance is the case in swine, or may be sharp-pointed and interlock
with those of the opposite jaw, in which case the animal is said to
be saw-toothed. The explanation of this latter arrangement is as follows.
The strength of such an animal is in its teeth, and these depend for
their efficiency on their sharpness. In order, then, to prevent their
getting blunted by mutual friction, such of them as serve for weapons
fit into each other's interspaces, and are so kept in proper condition.
No animal that has sharp interfitting teeth is at the same time furnished
with tusks. For nature never makes anything superfluous or in vain.
She gives, therefore, tusks to such animals as strike in fighting,
and serrated teeth to such as bite. Sows, for instance, have no tusks,
and accordingly sows bite instead of striking. 

A general principle must here be noted, which will be found applicable
not only in this instance but in many others that will occur later
on. Nature allots each weapon, offensive and defensive alike, to those
animals alone that can use it; or, if not to them alone, to them in
a more marked degree; and she allots it in its most perfect state
to those that can use it best; and this whether it be a sting, or
a spur, or horns, or tusks, or what it may of a like kind.

Thus as males are stronger and more choleric than females, it is in
males that such parts as those just mentioned are found, either exclusively,
as in some species, or more fully developed, as in others. For though
females are of course provided with such parts as are no less necessary
to them than to males, the parts, for instance, which subserve nutrition,
they have even these in an inferior degree, and the parts which answer
no such necessary purpose they do not possess at all. This explains
why stags have horns, while does have none; why the horns of cows
are different from those of bulls, and, similarly, the horns of ewes
from those of rams. It explains also why the females are often without
spurs in species where the males are provided with them, and accounts
for similar facts relating to all other such parts. 

All fishes have teeth of the serrated form, with the single exception
of the fish known as the Scarus. In many of them there are teeth even
on the tongue and on the roof of the mouth. The reason for this is
that, living as they do in the water, they cannot but allow this fluid
to pass into the mouth with the food. The fluid thus admitted they
must necessarily discharge again without delay. For were they not
to do so, but to retain it for a time while triturating the food,
the water would run into their digestive cavities. Their teeth therefore
are all sharp, being adapted only for cutting, and are numerous and
set in many parts, that their abundance may serve in lieu of any grinding
faculty, to mince the food into small bits. They are also curved,
because these are almost the only weapons which fishes possess.

In all these offices of the teeth the mouth also takes its part; but
besides these functions it is subservient to respiration, in all such
animals as breathe and are cooled by external agency. For nature,
as already said, uses the parts which are common to all animals for
many special purposes, and this of her own accord. Thus the mouth
has one universal function in all animals alike, namely its alimentary
office; but in some, besides this, the special duty of serving as
a weapon is attached to it; in others that of ministering to speech;
and again in many, though not in all, the office of respiration. All
these functions are thrown by nature upon one single organ, the construction
of which she varies so as to suit the variations of office. Therefore
it is that in some animals the mouth is contracted, while in others
it is of wide dimensions. The contracted form belongs to such animals
as use the mouth merely for nutritive, respiratory, and vocal purposes;
whereas in such as use it as a means of defence it has a wide gape.
This is its invariable form in such animals as are saw-toothed. For
seeing that their mode of warfare consists in biting, it is advantageous
to them that their mouth shall have a wide opening; for the wider
it opens, the greater will be the extent of the bite, and the more
numerous will be the teeth called into play. 

What has just been said applies to fishes as well as to other animals;
and thus in such of them as are carnivorous, and made for biting,
the mouth has a wide gape; whereas in the rest it is small, being
placed at the extremity of a tapering snout. For this form is suited
for their purposes, while the other would be useless. 

In birds the mouth consists of what is called the beak, which in them
is a substitute for lips and teeth. This beak presents variations
in harmony with the functions and protective purposes which it serves.
Thus in those birds that are called Crooked-clawed it is invariably
hooked, inasmuch as these birds are carnivorous, and eat no kind of
vegetable food whatsoever. For this form renders it serviceable to
them in obtaining the mastery over their prey, and is better suited
for deeds of violence than any other. Moreover, as their weapons of
offence consist of this beak and of their claws, these latter also
are more crooked in them than in the generality of birds. Similarly
in each other kind of bird the beak is suited to the mode of life.
Thus, in woodpeckers it is hard and strong, as also in crows and birds
of crowlike habit, while in the smaller birds it is delicate, so as
to be of use in collecting seeds and picking up minute animals. In
such birds, again, as eat herbage, and such as live about marshes-those,
for example, that swim and have webbed feet-the bill is broad, or
adapted in some other way to the mode of life. For a broad bill enables
a bird to dig into the ground with ease, just as, among quadrupeds,
does the broad snout of the pig, an animal which, like the birds in
question, lives on roots. Moreover, in these root-eating birds and
in some others of like habits of life, the tips of the bill end in
hard points, which gives them additional facility in dealing with
herbaceous food. 

The several parts which are set on the head have now, pretty nearly
all, been considered. In man, however, the part which lies between
the head and the neck is called the face, this name, (prosopon) being,
it would seem, derived from the function of the part. For as man is
the only animal that stands erect, he is also the only one that looks
directly in front (proso) and the only one whose voice is emitted
in that direction. 

Part 2

We have now to treat of horns; for these also, when present, are appendages
of the head. They exist in none but viviparous animals; though in
some ovipara certain parts are metaphorically spoken of as horns,
in virtue of a certain resemblance. To none of such parts, however,
does the proper office of a horn belong; for they are never used,
as are the horns of vivipara, for purposes which require strength,
whether it be in self-protection or in offensive strife. So also no
polydactylous animal is furnished with horns. For horns are defensive
weapons, and these polydactylous animals possess other means of security.
For to some of them nature has given claws, to others teeth suited
for combat, and to the rest some other adequate defensive appliance.
There are horns, however, in most of the cloven-hoofed animals, and
in some of those that have a solid hoof, serving them as an offensive
weapon, and in some cases also as a defensive one. There are horns
also in all animals that have not been provided by nature with some
other means of security; such means, for instance, as speed, which
has been given to horses; or great size, as in camels; for excessive
bulk, such as has been given to these animals, and in a still greater
measure to elephants, is sufficient in itself to protect an animal
from being destroyed by others. Other animals again are protected
by the possession of tusks; and among these are the swine, though
they have a cloven hoof. 

All animals again, whose horns are but useless appendages, have been
provided by nature with some additional means of security. Thus deer
are endowed with speed; for the large size and great branching of
their horns makes these a source of detriment rather than of profit
to their possessors. Similarly endowed are the Bubalus and gazelle;
for though these animals will stand up against some enemies and defend
themselves with their horns, yet they run away from such as are fierce
and pugnacious. The Bonasus again, whoe horns curve inwards towards
each other, is provided with a means of protection in the discharge
of its excrement; and of this it avails itself when frightened. There
are some other animals besides the Bonasus that have a similar mode
of defence. In no case, however, does nature ever give more than one
adequate means of protection to one and the same animal.

Most of the animals that have horns are cloven-hoofed; but the Indian
ass, as they call it, is also reported to be horned, though its hoof
is solid. 

Again as the body, so far as regards its organs of motion, consists
of two distinct parts, the right and the left, so also and for like
reasons the horns of animals are, in the great majority of cases,
two in number. Still there are some that have but a single horn; the
Oryx, for instance, and the so-called Indian ass; in the former of
which the hoof is cloven, while in the latter it is solid. In such
animals the horn is set in the centre of the head; for as the middle
belongs equally to both extremes, this arrangement is the one that
comes nearest to each side having its own horn. 

Again, it would appear consistent with reason that the single horn
should go with the solid rather than with the cloven hoof. For hoof,
whether solid or cloven, is of the same nature as horn; so that the
two naturally undergo division simultaneously and in the same animals.
Again, since the division of the cloven hoof depends on deficiency
of material, it is but rationally consistent, that nature, when she
gave an animal an excess of material for the hoofs, which thus became
solid, should have taken away something from the upper parts and so
made the animal to have but one horn. Rightly too did she act when
she chose the head whereon to set the horns; and AEsop's Momus is
beside the mark, when he finds fault with the bull for not having
its horns upon its shoulders. For from this position, says he, they
would have delivered their blow with the greatest force, whereas on
the head they occupy the weakest part of the whole body. Momus was
but dull-sighted in making this hostile criticism. For had the horns
been set on the shoulders, or had they been set on any other part
than they are, the encumbrance of their weight would have been increased,
not only without any compensating gain whatso::ver, but with the disadvantage
of impeding many bodily operations. For the point whence the blows
could be delivered with the greatest force was not the only matter
to be considered, but the point also whence they could be delivered
with the widest range. But as the bull has no hands and cannot possibly
have its horns on its feet or on its knees, where they would prevent
flexion, there remains no other site for them but the head; and this
therefore they necessarily occupy. In this position, moreover, they
are much less in the way of the movements of the body than they would
be elsewhere. 

Deer are the only animals in which the horns are solid throughout,
and are also the only animals that cast them. This casting is not
simply advantageous to the deer from the increased lightness which
it produces, but, seeing how heavy the horns are, is a matter of actual
necessity. 

In all other animals the horns are hollow for a certain distance,
and the end alone is solid, this being the part of use in a blow.
At the same time, to prevent even the hollow part from being weak,
the horn, though it grows out of the skin, has a solid piece from
the bones fitted into its cavity. For this arrangement is not only
that which makes the horns of the greatest service in fighting, but
that which causes them to be as little of an impediment as possible
in the other actions of life. 

Such then are the reasons for which horns exist; and such the reasons
why they are present in some animals, absent from others.

Let us now consider the character of the material nature whose necessary
results have been made available by rational nature for a final cause.

In the first place, then, the larger the bulk of animals, the greater
is the proportion of corporeal and earthy matter which they contain.
Thus no very small animal is known to have horns, the smallest horned
animal that we are acquainted with being the gazelle. But in all our
speculations concerning nature, what we have to consider is the general
rule; for that is natural which applies either universally or generally.
And thus when we say that the largest animals have most earthy matter,
we say so because such is the general rule. Now this earthy matter
is used in the animal body to form bone. But in the larger animals
there is an excess of it, and this excess is turned by nature to useful
account, being converted into weapons of defence. Part of it necessarily
flows to the upper portion of the body, and this is allotted by her
in some cases to the formation of tusks and teeth, in others to the
formation of horns. Thus it is that no animal that has horns has also
front teeth in both jaws, those in the upper jaw being deficient.
For nature by subtracting from the teeth adds to the horns; the nutriment
which in most animals goes to the former being here spent on the augmentation
of the latter. Does, it is true, have no horns and yet are equally
deficient with the males as regards the teeth. The reason, however,
for this is that they, as much as the males, are naturally horn-bearing
animals; but they have been stripped of their horns, because these
would not only be useless to them but actually baneful; whereas the
greater strength of the males causes these organs, though equally
useless, to be less of an impediment. In other animals, where this
material is not secreted from the body in the shape of horns, it is
used to increase the size of the teeth; in some cases of all the teeth,
in others merely of the tusks, which thus become so long as to resemble
horns projecting from the jaws. 

So much, then, of the parts which appertain to the head.

Part 3

Below the head lies the neck, in such animals as have one. This is
the case with those only that have the parts to which a neck is subservient.
These parts are the larynx and what is called the oesophagus. Of these
the former, or larynx, exists for the sake of respiration, being the
instrument by which such animals as breathe inhale and discharge the
air. Therefore it is that, when there is no lung, there is also no
neck. Of this condition the Fishes are an example. The other part,
or oesophagus, is the channel through which food is conveyed to the
stomach; so that all animals that are without a neck are also without
a distinct oesophagus; Such a part is in fact not required of necessity
for nutritive purposes; for it has no action whatsoever on the food.
Indeed there is nothing to prevent the stomach from being placed directly
after the mouth. This, however, is quite impossible in the case of
the lung. For there must be some sort of tube common to the two divisions
of the lung, by which--it being bipartite--the breath may be apportioned
to their respective bronchi, and thence pass into the air-pipes; and
such an arrangement will be the best for giving perfection to inspiration
and expiration. The organ then concerned in respiration must of necessity
be of some length; and this, again, necessitates there being an oesophagus
to unite mouth and stomach. This oesophagus is of a flesh-like character,
and yet admits of extension like a sinew. This latter property is
given to it, that it may stretch when food is introduced; while the
flesh-like character is intended to make it soft and yielding, and
to prevent it from being rasped by particles as they pass downwards,
and so suffering damage. On the other hand, the windpipe and the so-called
larynx are constructed out of a cartilaginous substance. For they
have to serve not only for respiration, but also for vocal purposes;
and an instrument that is to produce sounds must necessarily be not
only smooth but firm. The windpipe lies in front of the oesophagus,
although this position causes it to be some hindrance to the latter
in the act of deglutition. For if a morsel of food, fluid or solid,
slips into it by accident, choking and much distress and violent fits
of coughing ensue. This must be a matter of astonishment to any of
those who assert that it is by the windpipe that an animal imbibes
fluid. For the consequences just mentioned occur invariably, whenever
a particle of food slips in, and are quite obvious. Indeed on many
grounds it is ridiculous to say that this is the channel through which
animals imbibe fluid. For there is no passage leading from the lung
to the stomach, such as the oesophagus which we see leading thither
from the mouth. Moreover, when any cause produces sickness and vomiting,
it is plain enough when the fluid is discharged. It is manifest also
that fluid, when swallowed, does not pass directly into the bladder
and collect there, but goes first into the stomach. For, when red
wine is taken, the dejections of the stomach are seen to be coloured
by its dregs; and such discoloration has been even seen on many occasions
inside the stomach itself, in cases where there have been wounds opening
into that organ. However, it is perhaps silly to be minutely particular
in dealing with silly statements such as this. 

The windpipe then, owing to its position in front of the oesophagus,
is exposed, as we have said, to annoyance from the food. To obviate
this, however, nature has contrived the epiglottis. This part is not
found in all sanguineous animals, but only in such of them as have
a lung; nor in all of these, but only in such as at the same time
have their skin covered with hairs, and not either with scaly plates
or with feathers. In such scaly and feathered animals there is no
epiglottis, but its office is supplied by the larynx, which closes
and opens, just as in the other case the epiglottis falls down and
rises up; rising up during the ingress or egress of breath, and falling
down during the ingestion of food, so as to prevent any particle from
slipping into the windpipe. Should there be the slightest want of
accuracy in this movement, or should an inspiration be made during
the ingestion of food, choking and coughing ensue, as already has
been noticed. So admirably contrived, however, is the movement both
of the epiglottis and of the tongue, that, while the food is being
ground to a pulp in the mouth, the tongue very rarely gets caught
between the teeth; and, while the food is passing over the epiglottis
seldom does a particle of it slip into the windpipe. 

The animals which have been mentioned as having no epiglottis owe
this deficiency to the dryness of their flesh and to the hardness
of their skin. For an epiglottis made of such materials would not
admit of easy motion. It would, indeed, take a longer time to shut
down an epiglottis made of the peculiar flesh of these animals, and
shaped like that of those with hairy skins, than to bring the edges
of the windpipe itself into contact with each other. 

Thus much then as to the reason why some animals have an epiglottis
while others have none, and thus much also as to its use. It is a
contrivance of nature to remedy the vicious position of the windpipe
in front of the oesophagus. That position is the result of necessity.
For it is in the front and centre of the body that the heart is situated,
in which we say is the principle of life and the source of all motion
and sensation. (For sensation and motion are exercised in the direction
which we term forwards, and it is on this very relation that the distinction
of before and behind is founded.) But where the heart is, there and
surrounding it is the lung. Now inspiration, which occurs for the
sake of the lung and for the sake of the principle which has its seat
in the heart, is effected through the windpipe. Since then the heart
must of necessity lie in the very front place of all, it follows that
the larynx also and the windpipe must of necessity lie in front of
the oesophagus. For they lead to the lung and heart, whereas the oesophagus
leads to the stomach. And it is a universal law that, as regards above
and below, front and back, right and left, the nobler and more honourable
part invariably is placed uppermost, in front, and on the right, rather
than in the opposite positions, unless some more important object
stands in the way. 

Part 4

We have now dealt with the neck, the oesophagus, and the windpipe,
and have next to treat of the viscera. These are peculiar to sanguineous
animals, some of which have all of them, others only a part, while
no bloodless animals have any at all. Democritus then seems to have
been mistaken in the notion he formed of the viscera, if, that is
to say, he fancied that the reason why none were discoverable in bloodless
animals was that these animals were too small to allow them to be
seen. For, in sanguineous animals, both heart and liver are visible
enough when the body is only just formed, and while it is still extremely
small. For these parts are to be seen in the egg sometimes as early
as the third day, being then no bigger than a point; and are visible
also in aborted embryos, while still excessively minute. Moreover,
as the external organs are not precisely alike in all animals, but
each creature is provided with such as are suited to its special mode
of life and motion, so is it with the internal parts, these also differing
in different animals. Viscera, then, are peculiar to sanguineous animals;
and therefore are each and all formed from sanguineous material, as
is plainly to be seen in the new-born young of these animals. For
in such the viscera are more sanguineous, and of greater bulk in proportion
to the body, than at any later period of life, it being in the earliest
stage of formation that the nature of the material and its abundance
are most conspicuous. There is a heart, then, in all sanguineous animals,
and the reason for this has already been given. For that sanguineous
animals must necessarily have blood is self-evident. And, as the blood
is fluid, it is also a matter of necessity that there shall be a receptacle
for it; and it is apparently to meet this requirement that nature
has devised the blood-vessels. These, again, must necessarily have
one primary source. For it is preferable that there shall be one such,
when possible, rather than several. This primary source of the vessels
is the heart. For the vessels manifestly issue from it and do not
go through it. Moreover, being as it is homogeneous, it has the character
of a blood-vessel. Again its position is that of a primary or dominating
part. For nature, when no other more important purpose stands in her
way, places the more honourable part in the more honourable position;
and the heart lies about the centre of the body, but rather in its
upper than its lower half, and also more in front than behind. This
is most evident in the case of man, but even in other animals there
is a tendency in the heart to assume a similar position, in the centre
of the necessary part of the body, that is to say of the part which
terminates in the vent for excrement. For the limbs vary in position
in different animals, and are not to be counted with the parts which
are necessary for life. For life can be maintained even when they
are removed; while it is self-evident that the addition of them to
an animal is not destructive of it. 

There are some who say that the vessels commence in the head. In this
they are clearly mistaken. For in the first place, according to their
representation, there would be many sources for the vessels, and these
scattered; and secondly, these sources would be in a region that is
manifestly cold, as is shown by its intolerance of chill, whereas
the region of the heart is as manifestly hot. Again, as already said,
the vessels continue their course through the other viscera, but no
vessel spreads through the heart. From this it is quite evident that
the heart is a part of the vessels and their origin; and for this
it is well suited by its structure. For its central part consists
of a dense and hollow substance, and is moreover full of blood, as
though the vessels took thence their origin. It is hollow to serve
for the reception of the blood, while its wall is dense, that it may
serve to protect the source of heat. For here, and here alone in all
the viscera and indeed in all the body, there is blood without blood-vessels,
the blood elsewhere being always contained within vessels. Nor is
this but consistent with reason. For the blood is conveyed into the
vessels from the heart, but none passes into the heart from without.
For in itself it constitutes the origin and fountain, or primary receptacle,
of the blood. It is however, from dissections and from observations
on the process of development that the truth of these statements receives
its clearest demonstration. For the heart is the first of all the
parts to be formed; and no sooner is it formed than it contains blood.
Moreover, the motions of pain and pleasure, and generally of all sensation,
plainly have their source in the heart, and find in it their ultimate
termination. This, indeed, reason would lead us to expect. For the
source must, when. ever possible, be one; and, of all places, the
best suited for a source is the centre. For the centre is one, and
is equally or almost equally within reach of every part. Again, as
neither the blood itself, nor yet any part which is bloodless, is
endowed with sensation, it is plain that that part which first has
blood, and which holds it as it were in a receptacle, must be the
primary source of sensation. And that this part is the heart is not
only a rational inference, but also evident to the senses. For no
sooner is the embryo formed, than its heart is seen in motion as though
it were a living creature, and this before any of the other parts,
it being, as thus shown, the starting-point of their nature in all
animals that have blood. A further evidence of the truth of what has
been stated is the fact that no sanguineous animal is without a heart.
For the primary source of blood must of necessity be present in them
all. It is true that sanguineous animals not only have a heart but
also invariably have a liver. But no one could ever deem the liver
to be the primary organ either of the whole body or of the blood.
For the position in which it is placed is far from being that of a
primary or dominating part; and, moreover, in the most perfectly finished
animals there is another part, the spleen, which as it were counterbalances
it. Still further, the liver contains no spacious receptacle in its
substance, as does the heart; but its blood is in a vessel as in all
the other viscera. The vessel, moreover, extends through it, and no
vessel whatsoever originates in it; for it is from the heart that
all the vessels take their rise. Since then one or other of these
two parts must be the central source, and since it is not the liver
which is such, it follows of necessity that it is the heart which
is the source of the blood, as also the primary organ in other respects.
For the definitive characteristic of an animal is the possession of
sensation; and the first sensory part is that which first has blood;
that is to say is the heart, which is the source of blood and the
first of the parts to contain it. 

The apex of the heart is pointed and more solid than the rest of the
organ. It lies against the breast, and entirely in the anterior part
of the body, in order to prevent that region from getting chilled.
For in all animals there is comparatively little flesh over the breast,
whereas there is a more abundant covering of that substance on the
posterior surface, so that the heat has in the back a sufficient amount
of protection. In all animals but man the heart is placed in the centre
of the pectoral region; but in man it inclines a little towards the
left, so that it may counterbalance the chilliness of that side. For
the left side is colder in man, as compared with the right, than in
any other animal. It has been stated in an earlier treatise that even
in fishes the heart holds the same position as in other animals; and
the reason has been given why it appears not to do so. The apex of
the heart, it is true, is in them turned towards the head, but this
in fishes is the front aspect, for it is the direction in which their
motion occurs. 

The heart again is abundantly supplied with sinews, as might reasonably
be expected. For the motions of the body commence from the heart,
and are brought about by traction and relaxation. The heart therefore,
which, as already said,' as it were a living creature inside its possessor,
requires some such subservient and strengthening parts. 

In no animals does the heart contain a bone, certainly in none of
those that we have ourselves inspected, with the exception of the
horse and a certain kind of ox. In these exceptional cases the heart,
owing to its large bulk, is provided with a bone as a support; just
as the bones serve as supports for the body generally. 

In animals of great size the heart has three cavities; in smaller
animals it has two; and in all has at least one, for, as already stated,
there must be some place in the heart to serve as a receptacle for
the first blood; which, as has been mentioned more than once, is formed
in this organ. But inasmuch as the main blood-vessels are two in number,
namely the so-called great vessel and the aorta, each of which is
the origin of other vessels; inasmuch, moreover, as these two vessels
present differences, hereafter to be discussed, when compared with
each other, it is of advantage that they also shall themselves have
distinct origins. This advantage will be obtained if each side have
its own blood, and the blood of one side be kept separate from that
of the other. For this reason the heart, whenever it is possible,
has two receptacles. And this possibility exists in the case of large
animals, for in them the heart, as the body generally, is of large
size. Again it is still better that there shall be three cavities,
so that the middle and odd one may serve as a centre common to both
sides. But this requires the heart to be of greater magnitude, so
that it is only in the largest hearts that there are three cavities.

Of these three cavities it is the right that has the most abundant
and the hottest blood, and this explains why the limbs also on the
right side of the body are warmer than those on the left. The left
cavity has the least blood of all, and the coldest; while in the middle
cavity the blood, as regards quantity and heat, is intermediate to
the other two, being however of purer quality than either. For it
behoves the supreme part to be as tranquil as possible, and this tranquillity
can be ensured by the blood being pure, and of moderate amount and
warmth. 

In the heart of animals there is also a kind of joint-like division,
something like the sutures of the skull. This is not, however, attributable
to the heart being formed by the union of several parts into a compound
whole, but is rather, as already said, the result of a joint-like
division. These jointings are most distinct in animals of keen sensibility,
and less so in those that are of duller feeling, in swine for instance.
Different hearts differ also from each other in their sizes, and in
their degrees of firmness; and these differences somehow extend their
influence to the temperaments of the animals. For in animals of low
sensibility the heart is hard and dense in texture, while it is softer
in such as are endowed with keener feeling. So also when the heart
is of large size the animal is timorous, while it is more courageous
if the organ be smaller and of moderate bulk. For in the former the
bodily affection which results from terror already pre-exists; for
the bulk of the heart is out of all proportion to the animal's heat,
which being small is reduced to insignificance in the large space,
and thus the blood is made colder than it would otherwise be.

The heart is of large size in the hare, the deer, the mouse, the hyena,
the ass, the leopard, the marten, and in pretty nearly all other animals
that either are manifestly timorous, or betray their cowardice by
their spitefulness. 

What has been said of the heart as a whole is no less true of its
cavities and of the blood-vessels; these also if of large size being
cold. For just as a fire of equal size gives less heat in a large
room than in a small one, so also does the heat in a large cavity
or a large blood-vessel, that is in a large receptacle, have less
effect than in a small one. Moreover, all hot bodies are cooled by
motions external to themselves, and the more spacious the cavities
and vessels are, the greater the amount of spirit they contain, and
the more potent its action. Thus it is that no animal that has large
cavities in its heart, or large blood-vessels, is ever fat, the vessels
being indistinct and the cavities small in all or most fat animals.

The heart again is the only one of the viscera, and indeed the only
part of the body, that is unable to tolerate any serious affection.
This is but what might reasonably be expected. For, if the primary
or dominant part be diseased, there is nothing from which the other
parts which depend upon it can derive succour. A proof that the heart
is thus unable to tolerate any morbid affection is furnished by the
fact that in no sacrificial victim has it ever been seen to be affected
with those diseases that are observable in the other viscera. For
the kidneys are frequently found to be full of stones, and growths,
and small abscesses, as also are the liver, the lung, and more than
all the spleen. There are also many other morbid conditions which
are seen to occur in these parts, those which are least liable to
such being the portion of the lung which is close to the windpipe,
and the portion of the liver which lies about the junction with the
great blood-vessel. This again admits of a rational explanation. For
it is in these parts that the lung and liver are most closely in communion
with the heart. On the other hand, when animals die not by sacrifice
but from disease, and from affections such as are mentioned above,
they are found on dissection to have morbid affections of the heart.

Thus much of the heart, its nature, and the end and cause of its existence
in such animals as have it. 

Part 5

In due sequence we have next to discuss the blood-vessels, that is
to say the great vessel and the aorta. For it is into these two that
the blood first passes when it quits the heart; and all the other
vessels are but offshoots from them. Now that these vessels exist
on account of the blood has already been stated. For every fluid requires
a receptacle, and in the case of the blood the vessels are that receptacle.
Let us now explain why these vessels are two, and why they spring
from one single source, and extend throughout the whole body.

The reason, then, why these two vessels coalesce into one centre,
and spring from one source, is that the sensory soul is in all animals
actually one; and this one-ness of the sensory soul determines a corresponding
one-ness of the part in which it primarily abides. In sanguineous
animals this one-ness is not only actual but potential, whereas in
some bloodless animals it is only actual. Where, however, the sensory
soul is lodged, there also and in the selfsame place must necessarily
be the source of heat; and, again, where this is there also must be
the source of the blood, seeing that it thence derives its warmth
and fluidity. Thus, then, in the oneness of the part in which is lodged
the prime source of sensation and of heat is involved the one-ness
of the source in which the blood originates; and this, again, explains
why the blood-vessels have one common starting-point. 

The vessels, again, are two, because the body of every sanguineous
animal that is capable of locomotion is bilateral; for in all such
animals there is a distinguishable before and behind, a right and
left, an above and below. Now as the front is more honourable and
of higher supremacy than the hinder aspect, so also and in like degree
is the great vessel superior to the aorta. For the great vessel is
placed in front, while the aorta is behind; the former again is plainly
visible in all sanguineous animals, while the latter is in some indistinct
and in some not discernible at all. 

Lastly, the reason for the vessels being distributed throughout the
entire body is that in them, or in parts analogous to them, is contained
the blood, or the fluid which in bloodless animals takes the place
of blood, and that the blood or analogous fluid is the material from
which the whole body is made. Now as to the manner in which animals
are nourished, and as to the source from which they obtain nutriment
and as to the way in which they absorb this from the stomach, these
are matters which may be more suitably considered and explained in
the treatise on Generation. But inasmuch as the parts are, as already
said, formed out of the blood, it is but rational that the flow of
the blood should extend, as it does, throughout the whole of the body.
For since each part is formed of blood, each must have blood about
and in its substance. 

To give an illustration of this. The water-courses in gardens are
so constructed as to distribute water from one single source or fount
into numerous channels, which divide and subdivide so as to convey
it to all parts; and, again, in house-building stones are thrown down
along the whole ground-plan of the foundation walls; because the garden-plants
in the one case grow at the expense of the water, and the foundation
walls in the other are built out of the stones. Now just after the
same fashion has nature laid down channels for the conveyance of the
blood throughout the whole body, because this blood is the material
out of which the whole fabric is made. This becomes very evident in
bodies that have undergone great emaciation. For in such there is
nothing to be seen but the blood-vessels; just as when fig-leaves
or vine-leaves or the like have dried up, there is nothing left of
them but their vessels. The explanation of this is that the blood,
or fluid which takes its place, is potentially body and flesh, or
substance analogous to flesh. Now just as in irrigation the largest
dykes are permanent, while the smallest are soon filled up with mud
and disappear, again to become visible when the deposit of mud ceases;
so also do the largest blood-vessels remain permanently open, while
the smallest are converted actually into flesh, though potentially
they are no whit less vessels than before. This too explains why,
so long as the flesh of an animal is in its integrity, blood will
flow from any part of it whatsoever that is cut, though no vessel,
however small, be visible in it. Yet there can be no blood, unless
there be a blood-vessel. The vessels then are there, but are invisible
owing to their being clogged up, just as the dykes for irrigation
are invisible until they have been cleared of mud. 

As the blood-vessels advance, they become gradually smaller and smaller,
until at last their tubes are too fine to admit the blood. This fluid
can therefore no longer find its way through them, though they still
give passage to the humour which we call sweat; and especially so
when the body is heated, and the mouths of the small vessels are dilated.
Instances, indeed, are not unknown of persons who in consequence of
a cachectic state have secreted sweat that resembled blood, their
body having become loose and flabby, and their blood watery, owing
to the heat in the small vessels having been too scanty for its concoction.
For, as was before said, every compound of earth and water-and both
nutriment and blood are such-becomes thicker from concoction. The
inability of the heat to effect concoction may be due either to its
being absolutely small in amount, or to its being small in proportion
to the quantity of food, when this has been taken excess. This excess
again may be of two kinds, either quantitative or qualitative; for
all substances are not equally amenable to concoction. 

The widest passages in the body are of all parts the most liable to
haemorrhage; so that bleeding occurs not infrequently from the nostrils,
the gums, and the fundament, occasionally also from the mouth. Such
haemorrhages are of a passive kind, and not violent as are those from
the windpipe. 

The great vessel and the aorta, which above lie somewhat apart, lower
down exchange positions, and by so doing give compactness to the body.
For when they reach the point where the legs diverge, they each split
into two, and the great vessel passes from the front to the rear,
and the aorta from the rear to the front. By this they contribute
to the unity of the whole fabric. For as in plaited work the parts
hold more firmly together because of the interweaving, so also by
the interchange of position between the blood-vessels are the anterior
and posterior parts of the body more closely knit together. A similar
exchange of position occurs also in the upper part of the body, between
the vessels that have issued from the heart. The details however of
the mutual relations of the different vessels must be looked for in
the treatises on Anatomy and the Researches concerning Animals.

So much, then, as concerns the heart and the blood-vessels. We must
now pass on to the other viscera and apply the same method of inquiry
to them. 

Part 6

The lung, then, is an organ found in all the animals of a certain
class, because they live on land. For there must of necessity be some
means or other of tempering the heat of the body; and in sanguineous
animals, as they are of an especially hot nature, the cooling agency
must be external, whereas in the bloodless kinds the innate spirit
is sufficient of itself for the purpose. The external cooling agent
must be either air or water. In fishes the agent is water. Fishes
therefore never have a lung, but have gills in its place, as was stated
in the treatise on Respiration. But animals that breathe are cooled
by air. These therefore are all provided with a lung. 

All land animals breathe, and even some water animals, such as the
whale, the dolphin, and all the spouting Cetacea. For many animals
lie half-way between terrestrial and aquatic; some that are terrestrial
and that inspire air being nevertheless of such a bodily constitution
that they abide for the most time in the water; and some that are
aquatic partaking so largely of the land character, that respiration
constitutes for them the man condition of life. 

The organ of respiration is the lung. This derives its motion from
the heart; but it is its own large size and spongy texture that affords
amplitude of space for entrance of the breath. For when the lung rises
up the breath streams in, and is again expelled when the lung collapses.
It has been said that the lung exists as a provision to meet the jumping
of the heart. But this is out of the question. For man is practically
the only animal whose heart presents this phenomenon of jumping, inasmuch
as he alone is influenced by hope and anticipation of the future.
Moreover, in most animals the lung is separated from the heart by
a considerable interval and lies above it, so that it can contribute
nothing to mitigate any jumping. 

The lung differs much in different animals. For in some it is of large
size and contains blood; while in others it is smaller and of spongy
texture. In the vivipara it is large and rich in blood, because of
their natural heat; while in the ovipara it is small and dry but capable
of expanding to a vast extent when inflated. Among terrestrial animals,
the oviparous quadrupeds, such as lizards, tortoises, and the like,
have this kind of lung; and, among inhabitants of the air, the animals
known as birds. For in all these the lung is spongy, and like foam.
For it is membranous and collapses from a large bulk to a small one,
as does foam when it runs together. In this too lies the explanation
of the fact that these animals are little liable to thirst and drink
but sparingly, and that they are able to remain for a considerable
time under water. For, inasmuch as they have but little heat, the
very motion of the lung, airlike and void, suffices by itself to cool
them for a considerable period. 

These animals, speaking generally, are also distinguished from others
by their smaller bulk. For heat promotes growth, and abundance of
blood is a sure indication of heat. Heat, again, tends to make the
body erect; and thus it is that man is the most erect of animals,
and the vivipara more erect than other quadrupeds. For no viviparous
animal, be it apodous or be it possessed of feet, is so given to creep
into holes as are the ovipara. 

The lung, then, exists for respiration; and this is its universal
office; but in one order of animals it is bloodless and has the structure
described above, to suit the special requirements There is, however,
no one term to denote all animals that have a lung; no designation,
that is, like the term Bird, applicable to the whole of a certain
class. Yet the possession of a lung is a part of their essence, just
as much as the presence of certain characters constitutes the essence
of a bird. 

Part 7

Of the viscera some appear to be single, as the heart and lung; others
to be double, as the kidneys; while of a third kind it is doubtful
in which class they should be reckoned. For the liver and the spleen
would seem to lie half-way between the single and the double organs.
For they may be regarded either as constituting each a single organ,
or as a pair of organs resembling each other in character.

In reality, however, all the organs are double. The reason for this
is that the body itself is double, consisting of two halves, which
are however combined together under one supreme centre. For there
is an upper and a lower half, a front and a rear, a right side and
a left. 

This explains why it is that even the brain and the several organs
of sense tend in all animals to consist of two parts; and the same
explanation applies to the heart with its cavities. The lung again
in Ovipara is divided to such an extent that these animals look as
though they had actually two lungs. As to the kidneys, no one can
overlook their double character. But when we come to the liver and
the spleen, any one might fairly be in doubt. The reason of this is,
that, in animals that necessarily have a spleen, this organ is such
that it might be taken for a kind of bastard liver; while in those
in which a spleen is not an actual necessity but is merely present,
as it were, by way of token, in an extremely minute form, the liver
plainly consists of two parts; of which the larger tends to lie on
the right side and the smaller on the left. Not but what there are
some even of the Ovipara in which this condition is comparatively
indistinctly marked; while, on the other hand, there are some Vivipara
in which the liver is manifestly divided into two parts. Examples
of such division are furnished by the hares of certain regions, which
have the appearance of having two livers, and by the cartilaginous
and some other fishes. 

It is the position of the liver on the right side of the body that
is the main cause for the formation of the spleen; the existence of
which thus becomes to a certain extent a matter of necessity in all
animals, though not of very stringent necessity. 

The reason, then, why the viscera are bilateral is, as we have said,
that there are two sides to the body, a right and a left. For each
of these sides aims at similarity with the other, and so likewise
do their several viscera; and as the sides, though dual, are knit
together into unity, so also do the viscera tend to be bilateral and
yet one by unity of constitution. 

Those viscera which lie below the diaphragm exist one and all on account
of the blood-vessels; serving as a bond, by which these vessels, while
floating freely, are yet held in connexion with the body. For the
vessels give off branches which run to the body through the outstretched
structures, like so many anchorlines thrown out from a ship. The great
vessel sends such branches to the liver and the spleen; and these
viscera-the liver and spleen on either side with the kidneys behind-attach
the great vessel to the body with the firmness of nails. The aorta
sends similar branches to each kidney, but none to the liver or spleen.

These viscera, then, contribute in this manner to the compactness
of the animal body. The liver and spleen assist, moreover, in the
concoction of the food; for both are of a hot character, owing to
the blood which they contain. The kidneys, on the other hand, take
part in the separation of the excretion which flows into the bladder.

The heart then and the liver are essential constituents of every animal;
the liver that it may effect concoction, the heart that it may lodge
the central source of heat. For some part or other there must be which,
like a hearth, shall hold the kindling fire; and this part must be
well protected, seeing that it is, as it were, the citadel of the
body. 

All sanguineous animals, then, need these two parts; and this explains
why these two viscera, and these two alone, are invariably found in
them all. In such of them, however, as breathe, there is also as invariably
a third, namely the lung. The spleen, on the other hand, is not invariably
present; and, in those animals that have it, is only present of necessity
in the same sense as the excretions of the belly and of the bladder
are necessary, in the sense, that is, of being an inevitable concomitant.
Therefore it is that in some animals the spleen is but scantily developed
as regards size. This, for instance, is the case in such feathered
animals as have a hot stomach. Such are the pigeon, the hawk, and
the kite. It is the case also in oviparous quadrupeds, where the spleen
is excessively minute, and in many of the scaly fishes. These same
animals are also without a bladder, because the loose texture of their
flesh allows the residual fluid to pass through and to be applied
to the formation of feathers and scales. For the spleen attracts the
residual humours from the stomach, and owing to its bloodlike character
is enabled to assist in their concoction. Should, however, this residual
fluid be too abundant, or the heat of the spleen be too scanty, the
body becomes sickly from over-repletion with nutriment. Often, too,
when the spleen is affected by disease, the belly becomes hard owing
to the reflux into it of the fluid; just as happens to those who form
too much urine, for they also are liable to a similar diversion of
the fluids into the belly. But in those animals that have but little
superfluous fluid to excrete, such as birds and fishes, the spleen
is never large, and in some exists no more than by way of token. So
also in the oviparous quadrupeds it is small, compact, and like a
kidney. For their lung is spongy, and they drink but little, and such
superfluous fluid as they have is applied to the growth of the body
and the formation of scaly plates, just as in birds it is applied
to the formation of feathers. 

On the other hand, in such animals as have a bladder, and whose lung
contains blood, the spleen is watery, both for the reason already
mentioned, and also because the left side of the body is more watery
and colder than the right. For each of two contraries has been so
placed as to go together with that which is akin to it in another
pair of contraries. Thus right and left, hot and cold, are pairs of
contraries; and right is conjoined with hot, after the manner described,
and left with cold. 

The kidneys when they are present exist not of actual necessity, but
as matters of greater finish and perfection. For by their special
character they are suited to serve in the excretion of the fluid which
collects in the bladder. In animals therefore where this fluid is
very abundantly formed, their presence enables the bladder to perform
its proper office with greater perfection. 

Since then both kidneys and bladder exist in animals for one and the
same function, we must next treat of the bladder, though in so doing
we disregard the due order of succession in which the parts should
be enumerated. For not a word has yet been said of the midriff, which
is one of the parts that environ the viscera and therefore has to
be considered with them. 

Part 8

It is not every animal that has a bladder; those only being apparently
intended by nature to have one, whose lung contains blood. To such
it was but reasonable that she should give this part. For the superabundance
in their lung of its natural constituents causes them to be the thirstiest
of animals, and makes them require a more than ordinary quantity not
merely of solid but also of liquid nutriment. This increased consumption
necessarily entails the production of an increased amount of residue;
which thus becomes too abundant to be concocted by the stomach and
excreted with its own residual matter. The residual fluid must therefore
of necessity have a receptacle of its own; and thus it comes to pass
that all animals whose lung contains blood are provided with a bladder.
Those animals, on the other hand, that are without a lung of this
character, and that either drink but sparingly owing to their lung
being of a spongy texture, or never imbibe fluid at all for drinking's
sake but only as nutriment, insects for instance and fishes, and that
are moreover clad with feathers or scales or scaly plates-all these
animals, owing to the small amount of fluid which they imbibe, and
owing also to such residue as there may be being converted into feathers
and the like, are invariably without a bladder. The Tortoises, which
are comprised among animals with scaly plates, form the only exception;
and this is merely due to the imperfect development of their natural
conformation; the explanation of the matter being that in the sea-tortoises
the lung is flesh-like and contains blood, resembling the lung of
the ox, and that in the land-tortoises it is of disproportionately
large size. Moreover, inasmuch as the covering which invests them
is dense and shell-like, so that the moisture cannot exhale through
the porous flesh, as it does in birds and in snakes and other animals
with scaly plates, such an amount of secretion is formed that some
special part is required to receive and hold it. This then is the
reason why these animals, alone of their kind, have a bladder, the
sea-tortoise a large one, the land-tortoises an extremely small one.

Part 9

What has been said of the bladder is equally true of the kidneys.
For these also are wanting in all animals that are clad with feathers
or with scales or with scale-like plates; the sea and land tortoises
forming the only exception. In some of the birds, however, there are
flattened kidney like bodies, as though the flesh allotted to the
formation of the kidneys, unable to find one single place of sufficient
size, had been scattered over several. 

The Emys has neither bladder nor kidneys. For the softness of its
shell allows of the ready transpiration of fluid; and for this reason
neither of the organs mentioned exists in this animal. All other animals,
however, whose lung contains blood are, as before said, provided with
kidneys. For nature uses these organs for two separate purposes, namely
for the excretion of the residual fluid, and to subserve the blood-vessels,
a channel leading to them from the great vessel. 

In the centre of the kidney is a cavity of variable size. This is
the case in all animals, excepting the seal. The kidneys of this animal
are more solid than those of any other, and in form resemble the kidneys
of the ox. The human kidneys are of similar shape; being as it were
made up of numerous small kidneys, and not presenting one unbroken
surface like the kidneys of sheep and other quadrupeds. For this reason,
should the kidneys of a man be once attacked by disease, the malady
is not easily expelled. For it is as though many kidneys were diseased
and not merely one; which naturally enhances the difficulties of a
cure. 

The duct which runs to the kidney from the great vessel does not terminate
in the central cavity, but is expended on the substance of the organ,
so that there is no blood in the cavity, nor is any coagulum found
there after death. A pair of stout ducts, void of blood, run, one
from the cavity of each kidney, to the bladder; and other ducts, strong
and continuous, lead into the kidneys from the aorta. The purpose
of this arrangement is to allow the superfluous fluid to pass from
the blood-vessel into the kidney, and the resulting renal excretion
to collect by the percolation of the fluid through the solid substance
of the organ, in its centre, where as a general rule there is a cavity.
(This by the way explains why the kidney is the most ill-savoured
of all the viscera.) From the central cavity the fluid is discharged
into the bladder by the ducts that have been mentioned, having already
assumed in great degree the character of excremental residue. The
bladder is as it were moored to the kidneys; for, as already has been
stated, it is attached to them by strong ducts. These then are the
purposes for which the kidneys exist, and such the functions of these
organs. 

In all animals that have kidneys, that on the right is placed higher
than that on the left. For inasmuch as motion commences from the right,
and the organs on this side are in consequence stronger than those
on the left, they must all push upwards in advance of their opposite
fellows; as may be seen in the fact that men even raise the right
eyebrow more than the left, and that the former is more arched than
the latter. The right kidney being thus drawn upwards is in all animals
brought into contact with the liver; for the liver lies on the right
side. 

Of all the viscera the kidneys are those that have the most fat. This
is in the first place the result of necessity, because the kidneys
are the parts through which the residual matters percolate. For the
blood which is left behind after this excretion, being of pure quality,
is of easy concoction, and the final result of thorough blood-concoction
is lard and suet. For just as a certain amount of fire is left in
the ashes of solid substances after combustion, so also does a remnant
of the heat that has been developed remain in fluids after concoction;
and this is the reason why oily matter is light, and floats on the
surface of other fluids. The fat is not formed in the kidneys themselves,
the density of their substance forbidding this, but is deposited about
their external surface. It consists of lard or of suet, according
as the animal's fat is of the former or latter character. The difference
between these two kinds of fat has already been set forth in other
passages. The formation, then, of fat in the kidneys is the result
of necessity; being, as explained, a consequence of the necessary
conditions which accompany the possession of such organs. But at the
same time the fat has a final cause, namely to ensure the safety of
the kidneys, and to maintain their natural heat. For placed, as these
organs are, close to the surface, they require a greater supply of
heat than other parts. For while the back is thickly covered with
flesh, so as to form a shield for the heart and neighbouring viscera,
the loins, in accordance with a rule that applies to all bendings,
are destitute of flesh; and fat is therefore formed as a substitute
for it, so that the kidneys may not be without protection. The kidneys,
moreover, by being fat are the better enabled to secrete and concoct
their fluid; for fat is hot, and it is heat that effects concoction.

Such, then, are the reasons why the kidneys are fat. But in all animals
the right kidney is less fat than its fellow. The reason for this
is, that the parts on the right side are naturally more solid and
more suited for motion than those on the left. But motion is antagonistic
to fat, for it tends to melt it. 

Animals then, as a general rule, derive advantage from their kidneys
being fat; and the fat is often very abundant and extends over the
whole of these organs. But, should the like occur in the sheep, death
ensues. Be its kidneys, however, as fat as they may, they are never
so fat but that some part, if not in both at any rate in the right
one, is left free. The reason why sheep are the only animals that
suffer in this manner, or suffer more than others, is that in animals
whose fat is composed of lard this is of fluid consistency, so that
there is not the same chance in their case of wind getting shut in
and causing mischief. But it is to such an enclosure of wind that
rot is due. And thus even in men, though it is beneficial to them
to have fat kidneys, yet should these organs become over-fat and diseased,
deadly pains ensue. As to those animals whose fat consists of suet,
in none is the suet so dense as in the sheep, neither is it nearly
so abundant; for of all animals there is none in which the kidneys
become so soon gorged with fat as in the sheep. Rot, then, is produced
by the moisture and the wind getting shut up in the kidneys, and is
a malady that carries off sheep with great rapidity. For the disease
forthwith reaches the heart, passing thither by the aorta and the
great vessel, the ducts which connect these with the kidneys being
of unbroken continuity. 

Part 10

We have now dealt with the heart and the lung, as also with the liver,
spleen, and kidneys. The latter are separated from the former by the
midriff or, as some call it, the Phrenes. This divides off the heart
and lung, and, as already said, is called Phrenes in sanguineous animals,
all of which have a midriff, just as they all have a heart and a liver.
For they require a midriff to divide the region of the heart from
the region of the stomach, so that the centre wherein abides the sensory
soul may be undisturbed, and not be overwhelmed, directly food is
taken, by its up-steaming vapour and by the abundance of heat then
superinduced. For it was to guard against this that nature made a
division, constructing the midriff as a kind of partition-wall and
fence, and so separated the nobler from the less noble parts, in all
cases where a separation of upper from lower is possible. For the
upper part is the more honourable, and is that for the sake of which
the rest exists; while the lower part exists for the sake of the upper
and constitutes the necessary element in the body, inasmuch as it
is the recipient of the food. 

That portion of the midriff which is near the ribs is fleshier and
stronger than the rest, but the central part has more of a membranous
character; for this structure conduces best to its strength and its
extensibility. Now that the midriff, which is a kind of outgrowth
from the sides of the thorax, acts as a screen to prevent heat mounting
up from below, is shown by what happens, should it, owing to its proximity
to the stomach, attract thence the hot and residual fluid. For when
this occurs there ensues forthwith a marked disturbance of intellect
and of sensation. It is indeed because of this that the midriff is
called Phrenes, as though it had some share in the process of thinking
(Phronein). in reality, however, it has no part whatsoever itself
in the matter, but, lying in close proximity to organs that have,
it brings about the manifest changes of intelligence in question by
acting upon them. This too explains why its central part is thin.
For though this is in some measure the result of necessity, inasmuch
as those portions of the fleshy whole which lie nearest to the ribs
must necessarily be fleshier than the rest, yet besides this there
is a final cause, namely to give it as small a proportion of humour
as possible; for, had it been made of flesh throughout, it would have
been more likely to attract and hold a large amount of this. That
heating of it affects sensation rapidly and in a notable manner is
shown by the phenomena of laughing. For when men are tickled they
are quickly set a-laughing, because the motion quickly reaches this
part, and heating it though but slightly nevertheless manifestly so
disturbs the mental action as to occasion movements that are independent
of the will. That man alone is affected by tickling is due firstly
to the delicacy of his skin, and secondly to his being the only animal
that laughs. For to be tickled is to be set in laughter, the laughter
being produced such a motion as mentioned of the region of the armpit.

It is said also that when men in battle are wounded anywhere near
the midriff, they are seen to laugh, owing to the heat produced by
the wound. This may possibly be the case. At any rate it is a statement
made by much more credible persons than those who tell the story of
the human head, how it speaks after it is cut off. For so some assert,
and even call in Homer to support them, representing him as alluding
to this when he wrote, 'His head still speaking rolled into the dust,'
instead of 'The head of the speaker'. So fully was the possibility
of such an occurrence accepted in Caria, that one of that country
was actually brought to trial under the following circumstances. The
priest of Zeus Hoplosmios had been murdered; but as yet it had not
been ascertained who was the assassin; when certain persons asserted
that they had heard the murdered man's head, which had been severed
from the body, repeat several times the words, 'Cercidas slew man
on mam.' Search was thereupon made and a man of those parts who bore
the name of Cercidas hunted out and put upon his trial. But it is
impossible that any one should utter a word when the windpipe is severed
and no motion any longer derived from the lung. Moreover, among the
Barbarians, where heads are chopped off with great rapidity, nothing
of the kind has ever yet occurred. Why, again, does not the like occur
in the case of other animals than man? For that none of them should
laugh, when their midriff is wounded, is but what one would expect;
for no animal but man ever laughs. So, too, there is nothing irrational
in supposing that the trunk may run forwards to a certain distance
after the head has been cut seeing that bloodless animals at any rate
can live, and that for a considerable time, after decapitation, as
has been set forth and explained in other passages. 

The purposes, then, for which the viscera severally exist have now
been stated. It is of necessity upon the inner terminations of the
vessels that they are developed; for humour, and that of a bloody
character, cannot but exude at these points, and it is of this, solidified
and coagulated, that the substance of the viscera is formed. Thus
they are of a bloody character, and in substance resemble each other
while they differ from other parts. 

Part 11

The viscera are enclosed each in a membrane. For they require some
covering to protect them from injury, and require, moreover, that
this covering shall be light. To such requirements membrane is well
adapted; for it is close in texture so as to form a good protection,
destitute of flesh so as neither to attract humour nor retain it,
and thin so as to be light and not add to the weight of the body.
Of the membranes those are the stoutest and strongest which invest
the heart and the brain; as is but consistent with reason. For these
are the parts which require most protection, seeing that they are
the main governing powers of life, and that it is to governing powers
that guard is due. 

Part 12

Some animals have all the viscera that have been enumerated; others
have only some of them. In what kind of animals this latter is the
case, and what is the explanation, has already been stated. Moreover,
the self-same viscera present differences in different possessors.
For the heart is not precisely alike in all animals that have one;
nor, in fact, is any viscus whatsoever. Thus the liver is in some
animals split into several parts, while in others it is comparatively
undivided. Such differences in its form present themselves even among
those sanguineous animals that are viviparous, but are more marked
in fishes and in the oviparous quadrupeds, and this whether we compare
them with each other or with the Vivipara. As for birds, their liver
very nearly resembles that of the Vivipara; for in them, as in these,
it is of a pure and blood-like colour. The reason of this is that
the body in both these classes of animals admits of the freest exhalation,
so that the amount of foul residual matter within is but small. Hence
it is that some of the Vivipara are without any gall-bladder at all.
For the liver takes a large share in maintaining the purity of composition
and the healthiness of the body. For these are conditions that depend
finally and in the main upon the blood, and there is more blood in
the liver than in any of the other viscera, the heart only excepted.
On the other hand, the liver of oviparous quadrupeds and fishes inclines,
as a rule, to a yellow hue, and there are even some of them in which
it is entirely of this bad colour, in accordance with the bad composition
of their bodies generally. Such, for instance, is the case in the
toad, the tortoise, and other similar animals. 

The spleen, again, varies in different animals. For in those that
have horns and cloven hoofs, such as the goat, the sheep, and the
like, it is of a rounded form; excepting when increased size has caused
some part of it to extend its growth longitudinally, as has happened
in the case of the ox. On the other hand, it is elongated in all polydactylous
animals. Such, for instance, is the case in the pig, in man, and in
the dog. While in animals with solid hoofs it is of a form intermediate
to these two, being broad in one part, narrow in another. Such, for
example, is its shape in the horse, the mule, and the ass.

Part 13

The viscera differ from the flesh not only in the turgid aspect of
their substance, but also in position; for they lie within the body,
whereas the flesh is placed on the outside. The explanation of this
is that these parts partake of the character of blood-vessels, and
that while the former exist for the sake of the vessels, the latter
cannot exist without them. 

Part 14

Below the midriff lies the stomach, placed at the end of the oesophagus
when there is one, and in immediate contiguity with the mouth when
the oesophagus is wanting. Continuous with this stomach is what is
called the gut. These parts are present in all animals, for reasons
that are self-evident. For it is a matter of necessity that an animal
shall receive the incoming food; and necessary also that it shall
discharge the same when its goodness is exhausted. This residual matter,
again, must not occupy the same place as the yet unconcocted nutriment.
For as the ingress of food and the discharge of the residue occur
at distinct periods, so also must they necessarily occur in distinct
places. Thus there must be one receptacle for the ingoing food and
another for the useless residue, and between these, therefore, a part
in which the change from one condition to the other may be effected.
These, however, are matters which will be more suitably set forth
when we come to deal with Generation and Nutrition. What we have at
present to consider are the variations presented by the stomach and
its subsidiary parts. For neither in size nor in shape are these parts
uniformly alike in all animals. Thus the stomach is single in all
such sanguineous and viviparous animals as have teeth in front of
both jaws. It is single therefore in all the polydactylous kinds,
such as man, dog, lion, and the rest; in all the solid-hoofed animals
also, such as horse, mule, ass; and in all those which, like the pig,
though their hoof is cloven, yet have front teeth in both jaws. When,
however, an animal is of large size, and feeds on substances of so
thorny and ligneous a character as to be difficult of concoction,
it may in consequence have several stomachs, as for instance is the
case with the camel. A similar multiplicity of stomachs exists also
in the horned animals; the reason being that horn-bearing animals
have no front teeth in the upper jaw. The camel also, though it has
no horns, is yet without upper front teeth. The explanation of this
is that it is more essential for the camel to have a multiple stomach
than to have these teeth. Its stomach, then, is constructed like that
of animals without upper front teeth, and, its dental arrangements
being such as to match its stomach, the teeth in question are wanting.
They would indeed be of no service. Its food, moreover, being of a
thorny character, and its tongue necessarily made of a fleshy substance,
nature uses the earthy matter which is saved from the teeth to give
hardness to the palate. The camel ruminates like the horned animals,
because its multiple stomach resembles theirs. For all animals that
have horns, the sheep for instance, the ox, the goat, the deer, and
the like, have several stomachs. For since the mouth, owing to its
lack of teeth, only imperfectly performs its office as regards the
food, this multiplicity of stomachs is intended to make up for its
shortcomings; the several cavities receiving the food one from the
other in succession; the first taking the unreduced substances, the
second the same when somewhat reduced, the third when reduction is
complete, and the fourth when the whole has become a smooth pulp.
Such is the reason why there is this multiplicity of parts and cavities
in animals with such dentition. The names given to the several cavities
are the paunch, the honeycomb bag, the manyplies, and the reed. How
these parts are related to each other, in position and in shape, must
be looked for in the treatises on Anatomy and the Researches concerning
Animals. 

Birds also present variations in the part which acts as a recipient
of the food; and the reason for these variations is the same as in
the animals just mentioned. For here again it is because the mouth
fails to perform its office and fails even more completely-for birds
have no teeth at all, nor any instrument whatsoever with which to
comminute or grind down their food-it is, I say, because of this,
that in some of them what is called the crop precedes the stomach
and does the work of the mouth; while in others the oesophagus is
either wide throughout or a part of it bulges just before it enters
the stomach, so as to form a preparatory store-house for the unreduced
food; or the stomach itself has a protuberance in some part, or is
strong and fleshy, so as to be able to store up the food for a considerable
period and to concoct it, in spite of its not having been ground into
a pulp. For nature retrieves the inefficiency of the mouth by increasing
the efficiency and heat of the stomach. Other birds there are, such,
namely, as have long legs and live in marshes, that have none of these
provisions, but merely an elongated oesophagus. The explanation of
this is to be found in the moist character of their food. For all
these birds feed on substances easy of reduction, and their food being
moist and not requiring much concoction, their digestive cavities
are of a corresponding character. 

Fishes are provided with teeth, which in almost all of them are of
the sharp interfitting kind. For there is but one small section in
which it is otherwise. Of these the fish called Scarus (Parrot-fish)
is an example. And this is probably the reason why this fish apparently
ruminates, though no other fishes do so. For those horned animals
that have no front teeth in the upper jaw also ruminate.

In fishes the teeth are all sharp; so that these animals can divide
their food, though imperfectly. For it is impossible for a fish to
linger or spend time in the act of mastication, and therefore they
have no teeth that are flat or suitable for grinding; for such teeth
would be to no purpose. The oesophagus again in some fishes is entirely
wanting, and in the rest is but short. In order, however, to facilitate
the concoction of the food, some of them, as the Cestreus (mullet),
have a fleshy stomach resembling that of a bird; while most of them
have numerous processes close against the stomach, to serve as a sort
of antechamber in which the food may be stored up and undergo putrefaction
and concoction. There is contrast between fishes and birds in the
position of these processes. For in fishes they are placed close to
the stomach; while in birds, if present at all, they are lower down,
near the end of the gut. Some of the Vivipara also have processes
connected with the lower part of the gut which serve the same purpose
as that stated above. 

The whole tribe of fishes is of gluttonous appetite, owing to the
arrangements for the reduction of their food being very imperfect,
and much of it consequently passing through them without undergoing
concoction; and, of all, those are the most gluttonous that have a
straight intestine. For as the passage of food in such cases is rapid,
and the enjoyment derived from it in consequence but brief, it follows
of necessity that the return of appetite is also speedy.

It has already been mentioned that in animals with front teeth in
both jaws the stomach is of small size. It may be classed pretty nearly
always under one or other of two headings, namely as resembling the
stomach of the dog, or as resembling the stomach of the pig. In the
pig the stomach is larger than in the dog, and presents certain folds
of moderate size, the purpose of which is to lengthen out the period
of concoction; while the stomach of the dog is of small size, not
much larger in calibre than the gut, and smooth on the internal surface.

Not much larger, I say, than the gut; for in all animals after the
stomach comes the gut. This, like the stomach, presents numerous modifications.
For in some animals it is uniform, when uncoiled, and alike throughout,
while in others it differs in different portions. Thus in some cases
it is wider in the neighbourhood of the stomach, and narrower towards
the other end; and this explains by the way why dogs have to strain
so much in discharging their excrement. But in most animals it is
the upper portion that is the narrower and the lower that is of greater
width. 

Of greater length than in other animals, and much convoluted, are
the intestines of those that have horns. These intestines, moreover,
as also the stomach, are of ampler volume, in accordance with the
larger size of the body. For animals with horns are, as a rule, animals
of no small bulk, because of the thorough elaboration which their
food undergoes. The gut, except in those animals where it is straight,
invariably widens out as we get farther from the stomach and come
to what is called the colon, and to a kind of caecal dilatation. After
this it again becomes narrower and convoluted. Then succeeds a straight
portion which runs right on to the vent. This vent is known as the
anus, and is in some animals surrounded by fat, in others not so.
All these parts have been so contrived by nature as to harmonize with
the various operations that relate to the food and its residue. For,
as the residual food gets farther on and lower down, the space to
contain it enlarges, allowing it to remain stationary and undergo
conversion. Thus is it in those animals which, owing either to their
large size, or to the heat of the parts concerned, require more nutriment,
and consume more fodder than the rest. 

Neither is it without a purpose, that, just as a narrower gut succeeds
to the upper stomach, so also does the residual food, when its goodness
is thoroughly exhausted, pass from the colon and the ample space of
the lower stomach into a narrower channel and into the spiral coil.
For so nature can regulate her expenditure and prevent the excremental
residue from being discharged all at once. 

In all such animals, however, as have to be comparatively moderate
in their alimentation, the lower stomach presents no wide and roomy
spaces, though their gut is not straight, but has a number of convolutions.
For amplitude of space causes desire for ample food, and straightness
of the intestine causes quick return of appetite. And thus it is that
all animals whose food receptacles are either simple or spacious are
of gluttonous habits, the latter eating enormously at a meal, the
former making meals at short intervals. 

Again, since the food in the upper stomach, having just been swallowed,
must of necessity be quite fresh, while that which has reached the
lower stomach must have had its juices exhausted and resemble dung,
it follows of necessity that there must also be some intermediate
part, in which the change may be effected, and where the food will
be neither perfectly fresh nor yet dung. And thus it is that, in all
such animals as we are now considering, there is found what is called
the jejunum; which is a part of the small gut, of the gut, that is,
which comes next to the stomach. For this jejunum lies between the
upper cavity which contains the yet unconcocted food and the lower
cavity which holds the residual matter, which by the time it has got
here has become worthless. There is a jejunum in all these animals,
but it is only plainly discernible in those of large size, and this
only when they have abstained from food for a certain time. For then
alone can one hit on the exact period when the food lies half-way
between the upper and lower cavities; a period which is very short,
for the time occupied in the transition of food is but brief. In females
this jejunum may occupy any part whatsoever of the upper intestine,
but in males it comes just before the caecum and the lower stomach.

Part 15

What is known as rennet is found in all animals that have a multiple
stomach, and in the hare among animals whose stomach is single. In
the former the rennet neither occupies the large paunch, nor the honeycomb
bag, nor the terminal reed, but is found in the cavity which separates
this terminal one from the two first, namely in the so-called manyplies.
It is the thick character of their milk which causes all these animals
to have rennet; whereas in animals with a single stomach the milk
is thin, and consequently no rennet is formed. It is this difference
in thickness which makes the milk of horned animals coagulate, while
that of animals without horns does not. Rennet forms in the hare because
it feeds on herbage that has juice like that of the fig; for juice
of this kind coagulates the milk in the stomach of the sucklings.
Why it is in the manyplies that rennet is formed in animals with multiple
stomachs has been stated in the Problems. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOK IV

Part 1 

The account which has now been given of the viscera, the stomach,
and the other several parts holds equally good not only for the oviparous
quadrupeds, but also for such apodous animals as the Serpents. These
two classes of animals are indeed nearly akin, a serpent resembling
a lizard which has been lengthened out and deprived of its feet. Fishes,
again, resemble these two groups in all their parts, excepting that,
while these, being land animals, have a lung, fishes have no lung,
but gills in its place. None of these animals, excepting the tortoise,
as also no fish, has a urinary bladder. For owing to the bloodlessness
of their lung, they drink but sparingly; and such fluid as they have
is diverted to the scaly plates, as in birds it is diverted to the
feathers, and thus they come to have the same white matter on the
surface of their excrement as we see on that of birds. For in animals
that have a bladder, its excretion when voided throws down a deposit
of earthy brine in the containing vessel. For the sweet and fresh
elements, being light, are expended on the flesh. 

Among the Serpents, the same peculiarity attaches to vipers, as among
fishes attaches to Selachia. For both these and vipers are externally
viviparous, but previously produce ova internally. 

The stomach in all these animals is single, just as it is single in
all other animals that have teeth in front of both jaws; and their
viscera are excessively small, as always happens when there is no
bladder. In serpents these viscera are, moreover, differently shaped
from those of other animals. For, a serpent's body being long and
narrow, its contents are as it were moulded into a similar form, and
thus come to be themselves elongated. 

All animals that have blood possess an omentum, a mesentery, intestines
with their appendages, and, moreover, a diaphragm and a heart; and
all, excepting fishes, a lung and a windpipe. The relative positions,
moreover, of the windpipe and the oesophagus are precisely similar
in them all; and the reason is the same as has already been given.

Part 2

Almost all sanguineous animals have a gall-bladder. In some this is
attached to the liver, in others separated from that organ and attached
to the intestines, being apparently in the latter case no less than
in the former an appendage of the lower stomach. It is in fishes that
this is most clearly seen. For all fishes have a gall-bladder; and
in most of them it is attached to the intestine, being in some, as
in the Amia, united with this, like a border, along its whole length.
It is similarly placed in most serpents There are therefore no good
grounds for the view entertained by some writers, that the gall exists
for the sake of some sensory action. For they say that its use is
to affect that part of the soul which is lodged in the neighbourhood
of the liver, vexing this part when it is congealed, and restoring
it to cheerfulness when it again flows free. But this cannot be. For
in some animals there is absolutely no gall-bladder at all--in the
horse, for instance, the mule, the ass, the deer, and the roe; and
in others, as the camel, there is no distinct bladder, but merely
small vessels of a biliary character. Again, there is no such organ
in the seal, nor, of purely sea-animals, in the dolphin. Even within
the limits of the same genus, some animals appear to have and others
to be without it. Such, for instance, is the case with mice; such
also with man. For in some individuals there is a distinct gall-bladder
attached to the liver, while in others there is no gall-bladder at
all. This explains how the existence of this part in the whole genus
has been a matter of dispute. For each observer, according as he has
found it present or absent in the individual cases he has examined,
has supposed it to be present or absent in the whole genus. The same
has occurred in the case of sheep and of goats. For these animals
usually have a gall-bladder; but, while in some localities it is so
enormously big as to appear a monstrosity, as is the case in Naxos,
in others it is altogether wanting, as is the case in a certain district
belonging to the inhabitants of Chalcis in Euboea. Moreover, the gall-bladder
in fishes is separated, as already mentioned, by a considerable interval
from the liver. No less mistaken seems to be the opinion of Anaxagoras
and his followers, that the gall-bladder is the cause of acute diseases,
inasmuch as it becomes over-full, and spirts out its excess on to
the lung, the blood-vessels, and the ribs. For, almost invariably,
those who suffer from these forms of disease are persons who have
no gall-bladder at all, as would be quite evident were they to be
dissected. Moreover, there is no kind of correspondence between the
amount of bile which is present in these diseases and the amount which
is exuded. The most probable opinion is that, as the bile when it
is present in any other part of the body is a mere residuum or a product
of decay, so also when it is present in the region of the liver it
is equally excremental and has no further use; just as is the case
with the dejections of the stomach and intestines. For though even
the residua are occasionally used by nature for some useful purpose,
yet we must not in all cases expect to find such a final cause; for
granted the existence in the body of this or that constituent, with
such and such properties, many results must ensue merely as necessary
consequences of these properties. All animals, then, whose is healthy
in composition and supplied with none but sweet blood, are either
entirely without a gall-bladder on this organ, or have merely small
bile-containing vessels; or are some with and some without such parts.
Thus it is that the liver in animals that have no gall-bladder is,
as a rule, of good colour and sweet; and that, when there is a gall-bladder,
that part of the liver is sweetest which lies immediately underneath
it. But, when animals are formed of blood less pure in composition,
the bile serves for the excretion of its impure residue. For the very
meaning of excrement is that it is the opposite of nutriment, and
of bitter that it is the opposite of sweet; and healthy blood is sweet.
So that it is evident that the bile, which is bitter, cannot have
any use, but must simply be a purifying excretion. It was therefore
no bad saying of old writers that the absence of a gall-bladder gave
long life. In so saying they had in mind deer and animals with solid
hoofs. For such have no gall-bladder and live long. But besides these
there are other animals that have no gall-bladder, though those old
writers had not noticed the fact, such as the camel and the dolphin;
and these also are, as it happens, long-lived. Seeing, indeed, that
the liver is not only useful, but a necessary and vital part in all
animals that have blood, it is but reasonable that on its character
should depend the length or the shortness of life. Nor less reasonable
is it that this organ and none other should have such an excretion
as the bile. For the heart, unable as it is to stand any violent affection,
would be utterly intolerant of the proximity of such a fluid; and,
as to the rest of the viscera, none excepting the liver are necessary
parts of an animal. It is the liver therefore that alone has this
provision. In conclusion, wherever we see bile we must take it to
be excremental. For to suppose that it has one character in this part,
another in that, would be as great an absurdity as to suppose mucus
or the dejections of the stomach to vary in character according to
locality and not to be excremental wherever found. 

Part 3

So much then of the gall-bladder, and of the reasons why some animals
have one, while others have not. We have still to speak of the mesentery
and the omentum; for these are associated with the parts already described
and contained in the same cavity. The omentum, then, is a membrane
containing fat; the fat being suet or lard, according as the fat of
the animal generally is of the former or latter description. What
kinds of animals are so distinguished has been already set forth in
an earlier part of this treatise. This membrane, alike in animals
that have a single and in those that have a multiple stomach, grows
from the middle of that organ, along a line which is marked on it
like a seam. Thus attached, it covers the rest of the stomach and
the greater part of the bowels, and this alike in all sanguineous
animals, whether they live on land or in water. Now the development
of this part into such a form as has been described is the result
of necessity. For, whenever solid and fluid are mixed together and
heated, the surface invariably becomes membranous and skin-like. But
the region in which the omentum lies is full of nutriment of such
a mixed character. Moreover, in consequence of the close texture of
the membrane, that portion of the sanguineous nutriment will alone
filter into it which is of a greasy character; for this portion is
composed of the finest particles; and when it has so filtered in,
it will be concocted by the heat of the part, and will be converted
into suet or lard, and will not acquire a flesh-like or sanguineous
constitution. The development, then, of the omentum is simply the
result of necessity. But when once formed, it is used by nature for
an end, namely, to facilitate and to hasten the concoction of food.
For all that is hot aids concoction; and fat is hot, and the omentum
is fat. This too explains why it hangs from the middle of the stomach;
for the upper part of the stomach has no need of it, being assisted
in concoction by the adjacent liver. Thus much as concerns the omentum.

Part 4

The so-called mesentery is also a membrane; and extends continuously
from the long stretch of intestine to the great vessel and the aorta.
In it are numerous and close-packed vessels, which run from the intestines
to the great vessel and to the aorta. The formation of this membrane
we shall find to be the result of necessity, as is that of the other
[similar] parts. What, however, is the final cause of its existence
in sanguineous animals is manifest on reflection. For it is necessary
that animals shall get nutriment from without; and, again, that this
shall be converted into the ultimate nutriment, which is then distributed
as sustenance to the various parts; this ultimate nutriment being,
in sanguineous animals, what we call blood, and having, in bloodless
animals, no definite name. This being so, there must be channels through
which the nutriment shall pass, as it were through roots, from the
stomach into the blood-vessels. Now the roots of plants are in the
ground; for thence their nutriment is derived. But in animals the
stomach and intestines represent the ground from which the nutriment
is to be taken. The mesentery, then, is an organ to contain the roots;
and these roots are the vessels that traverse it. This then is the
final cause of its existence. But how it absorbs nutriment, and how
that portion of the food which enters into the vessels is distributed
by them to the various parts of the body, are questions which will
be considered when we come to deal with the generation and nutrition
of animals. 

The constitution of sanguineous animals, so far as the parts as yet
mentioned are concerned, and the reasons for such constitution, have
now been set forth. In natural sequence we should next go on to the
organs of generation, as yet undescribed, on which depend the distinctions
of male and female. But, inasmuch as we shall have to deal specially
with generation hereafter, it will be more convenient to defer the
consideration of these parts to that occasion. 

Part 5

Very different from the animals we have as yet considered are the
Cephalopoda and the Crustacea. For these have absolutely no viscera
whatsoever; as is indeed the case with all bloodless animals, in which
are included two other genera, namely the Testacea and the Insects.
For in none of them does the material out of which viscera are formed
exist. None of them, that is, have blood. The cause of this lies in
their essential constitution. For the presence of blood in some animals,
its absence from others, must be included in the conception which
determines their respective essences. Moreover, in the animals we
are now considering, none of those final causes will be found to exist
which in sanguineous animals determine the presence of viscera. For
they have no blood vessels nor urinary bladder, nor do they breathe;
the only part that it is necessary for them to have being that which
is analogous to a heart. For in all animals there must be some central
and commanding part of the body, to lodge the sensory portion of the
soul and the source of life. The organs of nutrition are also of necessity
present in them all. They differ, however, in character because of
differences of the habitats in which they get their subsistence.

In the Cephalopoda there are two teeth, enclosing what is called the
mouth; and inside this mouth is a flesh-like substance which represents
a tongue and serves for the discrimination of pleasant and unpleasant
food. The Crustacea have teeth corresponding to those of the Cephalopoda,
namely their anterior teeth, and also have the fleshy representative
of a tongue. This latter part is found, moreover, in all Testacea,
and serves, as in sanguineous animals, for gustatory sensations. Similarly
provided also are the Insects. For some of these, such as the Bees
and the Flies, have, as already described, their proboscis protruding
from the mouth; while those others that have no such instrument in
front have a part which acts as a tongue inside the mouth. Such, for
instance, is the case in the Ants and the like. As for teeth, some
insects have them, the Bees and the Ants for instance, though in a
somewhat modified form, while others that live on fluid nutriment
are without them. For in many insects the teeth are not meant to deal
with the food, but to serve as weapons. 

In some Testacea, as was said in the first treatise, the organ which
is called the tongue is of considerable strength; and in the Cochli
(Sea-snails) there are also two teeth, just as in the Crustacea. The
mouth in the Cephalopoda is succeeded by a long gullet. This leads
to a crop, like that of a bird, and directly continuous with this
is the stomach, from which a gut runs without windings to the vent.
The Sepias and the Poulps resemble each other completely, so far as
regards the shape and consistency of these parts. But not so the Teuthides
(Calamaries). Here, as in the other groups there are the two stomach-like
receptacles; but the first of these cavities has less resemblance
to a crop, and in neither is the form [or the consistency] the same
as in the other kinds, the whole body indeed being made of a softer
kind of flesh. 

The object of this arrangement of the parts in question is the same
in the Cephalopoda as in Birds; for these also are all unable to masticate
their food; and therefore it is that a crop precedes their stomach.

For purposes of defence, and to enable them to escape from their foes,
the Cephalopoda have what is called their ink. This is contained in
a membranous pouch, which is attached to the body and provided with
a terminal outlet just at the point where what is termed the funnel
gives issue to the residua of the stomach. This funnel is placed on
the ventral surface of the animal. All Cephalopoda alike have this
characteristic ink, but chief of all the Sepia, where it is more abundant
than in the rest. When the animal is disturbed and frightened it uses
this ink to make the surrounding water black and turbid, and so, as
it were, puts a shield in front of its body. 

In the Calamaries and the Poulps the ink-bag is placed in the upper
part of the body, in close proximity to the mytis, whereas in the
Sepia it is lower down, against the stomach. For the Sepia has a more
plentiful supply of ink than the rest, inasmuch as it makes more use
of it. The reasons for this are, firstly, that it lives near the shore,
and, secondly, that it has no other means of protection; whereas the
Poulp has its long twining feet to use in its defence, and is, moreover,
endowed with the power of changing colour. This changing of colour,
like the discharge of ink, occurs as the result of fright. As to the
Calamary, it lives far out at sea, being the only one of the Cephalopoda
that does so; and this gives it protection. These then are the reasons
why the ink is more abundant in the Sepia than in the Calamary, and
this greater abundance explains the lower position; for it allows
the ink to be ejected with ease even from a distance. The ink itself
is of an earthy character, in this resembling the white deposit on
the surface of a bird's excrement and the explanation in both cases
is the same, namely, the absence of a urinary bladder. For, in default
of this, it is the ink that serves for the excretion of the earthiest
matter. And this is more especially the case in the Sepia, because
there is a greater proportion of earth in its composition than in
that of the other Cephalopoda. The earthy character of its bone is
a clear indication of this. For in the Poulp there is no bone at all,
and in the Calamary it is thin and cartilaginous. Why this bone should
be present in some Cephalopoda, and wanting in others, and how its
character varies in those that have it, has now been set forth.

These animals, having no blood, are in consequence cold and of a timid
character. Now, in some animals, fear causes a disturbance of the
bowels, and, in others, a flow of urine from the bladder. Similarly
in these it produces a discharge of ink, and, though the ejection
of this ink in fright, like that of the urine, is the result of necessity,
and, though it is of excremental character, yet it is used by nature
for a purpose, namely, the protection and safety of the animal that
excretes it. 

The Crustacea also, both the Caraboid forms and the Crabs, are provided
with teeth, namely their two anterior teeth; and between these they
also present the tongue-like piece of flesh, as has indeed been already
mentioned. Directly after their mouth comes a gullet, which, if we
compare relative sizes, is but small in proportion to the body: and
then a stomach, which in the Carabi and some of the Crabs is furnished
with a second set of teeth, the anterior teeth being insufficient
for adequate mastication. From the stomach a uniform gut runs in a
direct line to the excremental vent. 

The parts described are to be found also in all the various Testacea.
The degree of distinctness, however, with which they are formed varies
in the different kinds, and the larger the size of the animal the
more easily distinguishable are all these parts severally. In the
Sea-snails, for example, we find teeth, hard and sharp, as before
mentioned, and between them the flesh-like substance, just as in the
Crustacea and Cephalopoda, and again the proboscis, which, as has
been stated, is something between a sting and a tongue. Directly after
the mouth comes a kind of bird-like crop, then a gullet, succeeded
by a stomach, in which is the mecon, as it is styled; and continuous
with this mecon is an intestine, starting directly from it. It is
this residual substance which appears in all the Testacea to form
the most palatable morsel. Purpuras and Whelks, and all other Testacea
that have turbinate shells, in structure resemble the Sea-snail. The
genera and species of Testacea are very numerous. For there are those
with turbinate shells, of which some have just been mentioned; and,
besides these, there are bivalves and univalves. Those with turbinate
shells may, indeed, after a certain fashion be said to resemble bivalves.
For they all from their very birth have an operculum to protect that
part of their body which is exposed to view. This is the case with
the Purpuras, with Whelks, with the Nerites, and the like. Were it
not for this, the part which is undefended by the shell would be very
liable to injury by collision with external objects. The univalves
also are not without protection. For on their dorsal surface they
have a shell, and by the under surface they attach themselves to the
rocks, and so after a manner become bivalved, the rock representing
the second valve. Of these the animals known as Limpets are an example.
The bivalves, scallops and mussels, for instance, are protected by
the power they have of closing their valves; and the Turbinata by
the operculum just mentioned, which transforms them, as it were, crom
univalves into bivalves. But of all there is none so perfectly protected
as the sea-urchin. For here there is a globular shell which encloses
the body completely, and which is, moreover, set with sharp spines.
This peculiarity distinguishes the sea-urchin from all other Testacea,
as has already been mentioned. 

The structure of the Testacea and of the Crustacea is exactly the
reverse of that of the Cephalopoda. For in the latter the fleshy substance
is on the outside and the earthy substance within, whereas in the
former the soft parts are inside and the hard part without. In the
sea-urchin, however, there is no fleshy part whatsoever.

All the Testacea then, those that have not been mentioned as well
as those that have, agree as stated in possessing a mouth with the
tongue-like body, a stomach, and a vent for excrement, but they differ
from each other in the positions and proportions of these parts. The
details, however, of these differences must be looked for in the Researches
concerning Animals and the treatises on Anatomy. For while there are
some points which can be made clear by verbal description, there are
others which are more suited for ocular demonstration. 

Peculiar among the Testacea are the sea-urchins and the animals known
as Tethya (Ascidians). The sea-urchins have five teeth, and in the
centre of these the fleshy body which is common to all the animals
we have been discussing. Immediately after this comes a gullet, and
then the stomach, divided into a number of separate compartments,
which look like so many distinct stomachs; for the cavities are separate
and all contain abundant residual matter. They are all, however, connected
with one and the same oesophagus, and they all end in one and the
same excremental vent. There is nothing besides the stomach of a fleshy
character, as has already been stated. All that can be seen are the
so-called ova, of which there are several, contained each in a separate
membrane, and certain black bodies which have no name, and which,
beginning at the animal's mouth, are scattered round its body here
and there promiscuously. These sea-urchins are not all of one species,
but there are several different kinds, and in all of them the parts
mentioned are to be found. It is not, however, in every kind that
the so-called ova are edible. Neither do these attain to any size
in any other species than that with which we are all familiar. A similar
distinction may be made generally in the case of all Testacea. For
there is a great difference in the edible qualities of the flesh of
different kinds; and in some, moreover, the residual substance known
as the mecon is good for food, while in others it is uneatable. This
mecon in the turbinated genera is lodged in the spiral part of the
shell, while in univalves, such as limpets, it occupies the fundus,
and in bivalves is placed near the hinge, the so-called ovum lying
on the right; while on the opposite side is the vent. The former is
incorrectly termed ovum, for it merely corresponds to what in well-fed
sanguineous animals is fat; and thus it is that it makes its appearance
in Testacea at those seasons of the year when they are in good condition,
namely, spring and autumn. For no Testacea can abide extremes of temperature,
and they are therefore in evil plight in seasons of great cold or
heat. This is clearly shown by what occurs in the case of the sea-urchins.
For though the ova are to be found in these animals even directly
they are born, yet they acquire a greater size than usual at the time
of full moon; not, as some think, because sea-urchins eat more at
that season, but because the nights are then warmer, owing to the
moonlight. For these creatures are bloodless, and so are unable to
stand cold and require warmth. Therefore it is that they are found
in better condition in summer than at any other season; and this all
over the world excepting in the Pyrrhean tidal strait. There the sea-urchins
flourish as well in winter as in summer. But the reason for this is
that they have a greater abundance of food in the winter, because
the fish desert the strait at that season. 

The number of the ova is the same in all sea-urchins, and is an odd
one. For there are five ova, just as there are also five teeth and
five stomachs; and the explanation of this is to be found in the fact
that the so-called ova are not really ova, but merely, as was said
before, the result of the animal's well-fed condition. Oysters also
have a so-called ovum, corresponding in character to that of the sea-urchins,
but existing only on one side of their body. Now inasmuch as the sea-urchin
is of a spherical form, and not merely a single disk like the oyster,
and in virtue of its spherical shape is the same from whatever side
it be examined, its ovum must necessarily be of a corresponding symmetry.
For the spherical shape has not the asymmetry of the disk-shaped body
of the oysters. For in all these animals the head is central, but
in the sea-urchin the so-called ovum is above [and symmetrical, while
in the oyster it is only one side]. Now the necessary symmetry would
be observed were the ovum to form a continuous ring. But this may
not be. For it would be in opposition to what prevails in the whole
tribe of Testacea; for in all the ovum is discontinuous, and in all
excepting the sea-urchins asymmetrical, being placed only on one side
of the body. Owing then to this necessary discontinuity of the ovum,
which belongs to the sea-urchin as a member of the class, and owing
to the spherical shape of its body, which is its individual peculiarity,
this animal cannot possibly have an even number of ova. For were they
an even number, they would have to be arranged exactly opposite to
each other, in pairs, so as to keep the necessary symmetry; one ovum
of each pair being placed at one end, the other ovum at the other
end of a transverse diameter. This again would violate the universal
provision in Testacea. For both in the oysters and in the scallops
we find the ovum only on one side of the circumference. The number
then of the ova must be uneven, three for instance, or five. But if
there were only three they would be much too far apart; while, if
there were more than five, they would come to form a continuous mass.
The former arrangement would be disadvantageous to the animal, the
latter an impossibility. There can therefore be neither more nor less
than five. For the same reason the stomach is divided into five parts,
and there is a corresponding number of teeth. For seeing that the
ova represent each of them a kind of body for the animal, their disposition
must conform to that of the stomach, seeing that it is from this that
they derive the material for their growth. Now if there were only
one stomach, either the ova would be too far off from it, or it would
be so big as to fill up the whole cavity, and the sea-urchin would
have great difficulty in moving about and finding due nourishment
for its repletion. As then there are five intervals between the five
ova, so are there of necessity five divisions of the stomach, one
for each interval. So also, and on like grounds, there are five teeth.
For nature is thus enabled to allot to each stomachal compartment
and ovum its separate and similar tooth. These, then, are the reasons
why the number of ova in the sea-urchin is an odd one, and why that
odd number is five. In some sea-urchins the ova are excessively small,
in others of considerable size, the explanation being that the latter
are of a warmer constitution, and so are able to concoct their food
more thoroughly; while in the former concoction is less perfect, so
that the stomach is found full of residual matter, while the ova are
small and uneatable. Those of a warmer constitution are, moreover,
in virtue of their warmth more given to motion, so that they make
expeditions in search of food, instead of remaining stationary like
the rest. As evidence of this, it will be found that they always have
something or other sticking to their spines, as though they moved
much about; for they use their spines as feet. 

The Ascidians differ but slightly from plants, and yet have more of
an animal nature than the sponges, which are virtually plants and
nothing more. For nature passes from lifeless objects to animals in
such unbroken sequence, interposing between them beings which live
and yet are not animals, that scarcely any difference seems to exist
between two neighbouring groups owing to their close proximity.

A sponge, then, as already said, in these respects completely resembles
a plant, that throughout its life it is attached to a rock, and that
when separated from this it dies. Slightly different from the sponges
are the so-called Holothurias and the sea-lungs, as also sundry other
sea-animals that resemble them. For these are free and unattached.
Yet they have no feeling, and their life is simply that of a plant
separated from the ground. For even among land-plants there are some
that are independent of the soil, and that spring up and grow, either
upon other plants, or even entirely free. Such, for example, is the
plant which is found on Parnassus, and which some call the Epipetrum.
This you may hang up on a peg and it will yet live for a considerable
time. Sometimes it is a matter of doubt whether a given organism should
be classed with plants or with animals. The Ascidians, for instance,
and the like so far resemble plants as that they never live free and
unattached, but, on the other hand, inasmuch as they have a certain
flesh-like substance, they must be supposed to possess some degree
of sensibility. 

An Ascidian has a body divided by a single septum and with two orifices,
one where it takes in the fluid matter that ministers to its nutrition,
the other where it discharges the surplus of unused juice, for it
has no visible residual substance, such as have the other Testacea.
This is itself a very strong justification for considering an Ascidian,
and anything else there may be among animals that resembles it, to
be of a vegetable character; for plants also never have any residuum.
Across the middle of the body of these Ascidians there runs a thin
transverse partition, and here it is that we may reasonably suppose
the part on which life depends to be situated. 

The Acalephae, or Sea-nettles, as they are variously called, are not
Testacea at all, but lie outside the recognized groups. Their constitution,
like that of the Ascidians, approximates them on one side to plants,
on the other to animals. For seeing that some of them can detach themselves
and can fasten upon their food, and that they are sensible of objects
which come in contact with them, they must be considered to have an
animal nature. The like conclusion follows from their using the asperity
of their bodies as a protection against their enemies. But, on the
other hand, they are closely allied to plants, firstly by the imperfection
of their structure, secondly by their being able to attach themselves
to the rocks, which they do with great rapidity, and lastly by their
having no visible residuum notwithstanding that they possess a mouth.

Very similar again to the Acalephae are the Starfishes. For these
also fasten on their prey, and suck out its juices, and thus destroy
a vast number of oysters. At the same time they present a certain
resemblance to such of the animals we have described as the Cephalopoda
and Crustacea, inasmuch as they are free and unattached. The same
may also be said of the Testacea. 

Such, then, is the structure of the parts that minister to nutrition
and which every animal must possess. But besides these organs it is
quite plain that in every animal there must be some part or other
which shall be analogous to what in sanguineous animals is the presiding
seat of sensation. Whether an animal has or has not blood, it cannot
possibly be without this. In the Cephalopoda this part consists of
a fluid substance contained in a membrane, through which runs the
gullet on its way to the stomach. It is attached to the body rather
towards its dorsal surface, and by some is called the mytis. Just
such another organ is found also in the Crustacea and there too is
known by the same name. This part is at once fluid and corporeal and,
as before said, is traversed by the gullet. For had the gullet been
placed between the mytis and the dorsal surface of the animal, the
hardness of the back would have interfered with its due dilatation
in the act of deglutition. On the outer surface of the mytis runs
the intestine; and in contact with this latter is placed the ink-bag,
so that it may be removed as far as possible from the mouth and its
obnoxious fluid be kept at a distance from the nobler and sovereign
part. The position of the mytis shows that it corresponds to the heart
of sanguineous animals; for it occupies the self-same place. The same
is shown by the sweetness of its fluid, which has the character of
concocted matter and resembles blood. 

In the Testacea the presiding seat of sensation is in a corresponding
position, but is less easily made out. It should, however, always
be looked for in some midway position; namely, in such Testacea as
are stationary, midway between the part by which food is taken in
and the channel through which either the excrement or the spermatic
fluid is voided, and, in those species which are capable of locomotion,
invariably midway between the right and left sides. 

In Insects this organ, which is the seat of sensation, lies, as was
stated in the first treatise, between the head and the cavity which
contains the stomach. In most of them it consists of a single part;
but in others, for instance in such as have long bodies and resemble
the Juli (Millipedes), it is made up of several parts, so that such
insects continue to live after they have been cut in pieces. For the
aim of nature is to give to each animal only one such dominant part;
and when she is unable to carry out this intention she causes the
parts, though potentially many, to work together actually as one.
This is much more clearly marked in some insects than in others.

The parts concerned in nutrition are not alike in all insects, but
show considerable diversity. Thus some have what is called a sting
in the mouth, which is a kind of compound instrument that combines
in itself the character of a tongue and of lips. In others that have
no such instrument in front there is a part inside the mouth that
answers the same sensory purposes. Immediately after the mouth comes
the intestine, which is never wanting in any insect. This runs in
a straight line and without further complication to the vent; occasionally,
however, it has a spiral coil. There are, moreover, some insects in
which a stomach succeeds to the mouth, and is itself succeeded by
a convoluted intestine, so that the larger and more voracious insects
may be enabled to take in a more abundant supply of food. More curious
than any are the Cicadae. For here the mouth and the tongue are united
so as to form a single part, through which, as through a root, the
insect sucks up the fluids on which it lives. Insects are always small
eaters, not so much because of their diminutive size as because of
their cold temperament. For it is heat which requires sustenance;
just as it is heat which speedily concocts it. But cold requires no
sustenance. In no insects is this so conspicuous as in these Cicadae.
For they find enough to live on in the moisture which is deposited
from the air. So also do the Ephemera that are found about the Black
sea. But while these latter only live for a single day, the Cicadae
subsist on such food for several days, though still not many.

We have now done with the internal parts of animals, and must therefore
return to the consideration of the external parts which have not yet
been described. It will be better to change our order of exposition
and begin with the animals we have just been describing, so that proceeding
from these, which require less discussion, our account may have more
time to spend on the perfect kinds of animals, those namely that have
blood. 

Part 6

We will begin with Insects. These animals, though they present no
great multiplicity of parts, are not without diversities when compared
with each other. They are all manyfooted; the object of this being
to compensate their natural slowness and frigidity, and give greater
activity to their motions. Accordingly we find that those which, as
the (Millipedes), have long bodies, and are therefore the most liable
to refrigeration, have also the greatest number of feet. Again, the
body in these animals is insected-the reason for this being that they
have not got one vital centre but many-and the number of their feet
corresponds to that of the insections. 

Should the feet fall short of this, their deficiency is compensated
by the power of flight. Of such flying insects some live a wandering
life, and are forced to make long expeditions in search of food. These
have a body of light weight, and four feathers, two on either side,
to support it. Such are bees and the insects akin to them. When, however,
such insects are of very small bulk, their feathers are reduced to
two, as is the case with flies. Insects with heavy bodies and of stationary
habits, though not polypterous in the same way as bees, yet have sheaths
to their feathers to maintain their efficiency. Such are the Melolonthae
and the like. For their stationary habits expose their feathers to
much greater risks than are run by those of insects that are more
constantly in flight, and on this account they are provided with this
protecting shield. The feather of an insect has neither barbs nor
shaft. For, though it is called a feather, it is no feather at all,
but merely a skin-like membrane that, owing to its dryness, necessarily
becomes detached from the surface of the body, as the fleshy substance
grows cold. 

These animals then have their bodies insected, not only for the reasons
already assigned, but also to enable them to curl round in such a
manner as may protect them from injury; for such insects as have long
bodies can roll themselves up, which would be impossible were it not
for the insections; and those that cannot do this can yet draw their
segments up into the insected spaces, and so increase the hardness
of their bodies. This can be felt quite plainly by putting the finger
on one of the insects, for instance, known as Canthari. The touch
frightens the insect, and it remains motionless, while its body becomes
hard. The division of the body into segments is also a necessary result
of there being several supreme organs in place of one; and this again
is a part of the essential constitution of insects, and is a character
which approximates them to plants. For as plants, though cut into
pieces, can still live, so also can insects. There is, however, this
difference between the two cases, that the portions of the divided
insect live only for a limited time, whereas the portions of the plant
live on and attain the perfect form of the whole, so that from one
single plant you may obtain two or more. 

Some insects are also provided with another means of protection against
their enemies, namely a sting. In some this is in front, connected
with the tongue, in others behind at the posterior end. For just as
the organ of smell in elephants answers several uses, serving alike
as a weapon and for purposes of nutrition, so does also the sting,
when placed in connexion with the tongue, as in some insects, answer
more than one end. For it is the instrument through which they derive
their sensations of food, as well as that with which they suck it
up and bring it to the mouth. Such of these insects as have no anterior
sting are provided with teeth, which serve in some of them for biting
the food, and in others for its prehension and conveyance to the mouth.
Such are their uses, for instance, in ants and all the various kinds
of bees. As for the insects that have a sting behind, this weapon
is given them because they are of a fierce disposition. In some of
them the sting is lodged inside the body, in bees, for example, and
wasps. For these insects are made for flight, and were their sting
external and of delicate make it would soon get spoiled; and if, on
the other hand, it were of thicker build, as in scorpions, its weight
would be an incumbrance. As for scorpions that live on the ground
and have a tail, their sting must be set upon this, as otherwise it
would be of no use as a weapon. Dipterous insects never have a posterior
sting. For the very reason of their being dipterous is that they are
small and weak, and therefore require no more than two feathers to
support their light weight; and the same reason which reduces their
feathers to two causes their sting to be in front; for their strength
is not sufficient to allow them to strike efficiently with the hinder
part of the body. Polypterous insects, on the other hand, are of greater
bulk-indeed it is this which causes them to have so many feathers;
and their greater size makes them stronger in their hinder parts.
The sting of such insects is therefore placed behind. Now it is better,
when possible, that one and the same instrument shall not be made
to serve several dissimilar uses; but that there shall be one organ
to serve as a weapon, which can then be very sharp, and a distinct
one to serve as a tongue, which can then be of spongy texture and
fit to absorb nutriment. Whenever, therefore, nature is able to provide
two separate instruments for two separate uses, without the one hampering
the other, she does so, instead of acting like a coppersmith who for
cheapness makes a spit and lampholder in one. It is only when this
is impossible that she uses one organ for several functions.

The anterior legs are in some cases longer than the others, that they
may serve to wipe away any foreign matter that may lodge on the insect's
eyes and obstruct its sight, which already is not very distinct owing
to the eyes being made of a hard substance. Flies and bees and the
like may be constantly seen thus dressing themselves with crossed
forelegs. Of the other legs, the hinder are bigger than the middle
pair, both to aid in running and also that the insect, when it takes
flight, may spring more easily from the ground. This difference is
still more marked in such insects as leap, in locusts for instance,
and in the various kinds of fleas. For these first bend and then extend
the legs, and, by doing so, are necessarily shot up from the ground.
It is only the. hind legs of locusts, and not the front ones, that
resemble the steering oars of a ship. For this requires that the joint
shall be deflected inwards, and such is never the case with the anterior
limbs. The whole number of legs, including those used in leaping,
is six in all these insects. 

Part 7

In the Testacea the body consists of but few parts, the reason being
that these animals live a stationary life. For such animals as move
much about must of necessity have more numerous parts than such as
remain quiet; for their activities are many, and the more diversified
the movements the greater the number of organs required to effect
them. Some species of Testacea are absolutely motionless, and others
not quite but nearly so. Nature, however, has provided them with a
protection in the hardness of the shell with which she has invested
their body. This shell, as already has been said, may have one valve,
or two valves, or be turbinate. In the latter case it may be either
spiral, as in whelks, or merely globular, as in sea-urchins. When
it has two valves, these may be gaping, as in scallops and mussels,
where the valves are united together on one side only, so as to open
and shut on the other; or they may be united together on both sides,
as in the Solens (razor-fishes). In all cases alike the Testacea have,
like plants, the head downwards. The reason for this is, that they
take in their nourishment from below, just as do plants with their
roots. Thus the under parts come in them to be above, and the upper
parts to be below. The body is enclosed in a membrane, and through
this the animal filters fluid free from salt and absorbs its nutriment.
In all there is a head; but none of the parts, excepting this recipient
of food, has any distinctive name. 

Part 8

All the Crustacea can crawl as well as swim, and accordingly they
are provided with numerous feet. There are four main genera, viz.
the Carabi, as they are called, the Astaci, the Carides, and the Carcini.
In each of these genera, again, there are numerous species, which
differ from each other not only as regards shape, but also very considerably
as regards size. For, while in some species the individuals are large,
in others they are excessively minute. The Carcinoid and Caraboid
Crustacea resemble each other in possessing claws. These claws are
not for locomotion, but to serve in place of hands for seizing and
holding objects; and they are therefore bent in the opposite direction
to the feet, being so twisted as to turn their convexity towards the
body, while their feet turn towards it their concavity. For in this
position the claws are best suited for laying hold of the food and
carrying it to the mouth. The distinction between the Carabi and the
Carcini (Crabs) consists in the former having a tail while the latter
have none. For the Carabi swim about and a tail is therefore of use
to them, serving for their propulsion like the blade of an oar. But
it would be of no use to the Crabs; for these animals live habitually
close to the shore, and creep into holes and corners. In such of them
as live out at sea, the feet are much less adapted for locomotion
than in the rest, because they are little given to moving about but
depend for protection on their shell-like covering. The Maiae and
the crabs known as Heracleotic are examples of this; the legs in the
former being very thin, in the latter very short. 

The very minute crabs that are found among the small fry at the bottom
of the net have their hindermost feet flattened out into the semblance
of fins or oar-blades, so as to help the animal in swimming.

The Carides are distinguished from the Carcinoid species by the presence
of a tail; and from the Caraboids by the absence of claws. This is
explained by their large number of feet, on which has been expended
the material for the growth of claws. Their feet again are numerous
to suit their mode of progression, which is mainly by swimming.

Of the parts on the ventral surface, those near the head are in some
of these animals formed like gills, for the admission and discharge
of water; while the parts lower down differ in the two sexes. For
in the female Carabi these are more laminar than in the males, and
in the female crabs the flap is furnished with hairier appendages.
This gives ampler space for the disposal of the ova, which the females
retain in these parts instead of letting them go free, as do fishes
and all other oviparous animals. In the Carabi and in the Crabs the
right claw is invariably the larger and the stronger. For it is natural
to every animal in active operations to use the parts on its right
side in preference to those on its left; and nature, in distributing
the organs, invariably assigns each, either exclusively or in a more
perfect condition, to such animals as can use it. So it is with tusks,
and teeth, and horns, and spurs, and all such defensive and offensive
weapons. 

In the Lobsters alone it is a matter of chance which claw is the larger,
and this in either sex. Claws they must have, because they belong
to a genus in which this is a constant character; but they have them
in this indeterminate way, owing to imperfect formation and to their
not using them for their natural purpose, but for locomotion.

For a detailed account of the several parts of these animals, of their
position and their differences, those parts being also included which
distinguish the sexes, reference must be made to the treatises on
Anatomy and to the Researches concerning Animals. 

Part 9

We come now to the Cephalopoda. Their internal organs have already
been described with those of other animals. Externally there is the
trunk of the body, not distinctly defined, and in front of this the
head surrounded by feet, which form a circle about the mouth and teeth,
and are set between these and the eyes. Now in all other animals the
feet, if there are any, are disposed in one of two ways; either before
and behind or along the sides, the latter being the plan in such of
them, for instance, as are bloodless and have numerous feet. But in
the Cephalopoda there is a peculiar arrangement, different from either
of these. For their feet are all placed at what may be called the
fore end. The reason for this is that the hind part of their body
has been drawn up close to the fore part, as is also the case in the
turbinated Testacea. For the Testacea, while in some points they resemble
the Crustacea, in others resemble the Cephalopoda. Their earthy matter
is on the outside, and their fleshy substance within. So far they
are like the Crustacea. But the general plan of their body is that
of the Cephalopoda; and, though this is true in a certain degree of
all the Testacea, it is more especially true of those turbinated species
that have a spiral shell. Of this general plan, common to the two,
we will speak presently. But let us first consider the case of quadrupeds
and of man, where the arrangement is that of a straight line. Let
A at the upper end of such a line be supposed to represent the mouth,
then B the gullet, and C the stomach, and the intestine to run from
this C to the excremental vent where D is inscribed. Such is the plan
in sanguineous animals; and round this straight line as an axis are
disposed the head and so-called trunk; the remaining parts, such as
the anterior and posterior limbs, having been superadded by nature,
merely to minister to these and for locomotion. 

In the Crustacea also and in Insects there is a tendency to a similar
arrangement of the internal parts in a straight line; the distinction
between these groups and the sanguineous animals depending on differences
of the external organs which minister to locomotion. But the Cephalopoda
and the turbinated Testacea have in common an arrangement which stands
in contrast with this. For here the two extremities are brought together
by a curve, as if one were to bend the straight line marked E until
D came close to Such, then, is the disposition of the internal parts;
and round these, in the Cephalopoda, is placed the sac (in the Poulps
alone called a head), and, in the Testacea, the turbinate shell which
corresponds to the sac. There is, in fact, only this difference between
them, that the investing substance of the Cephalopoda is soft while
the shell of the Testacea is hard, nature having surrounded their
fleshy part with this hard coating as a protection because of their
limited power of locomotion. In both classes, owing to this arrangement
of the internal organs, the excrement is voided near the mouth; at
a point below this orifice in the Cephalopoda, and in the Turbinata
on one side of it. 

Such, then, is the explanation of the position of the feet in the
Cephalopoda, and of the contrast they present to other animals in
this matter. The arrangement, however, in the Sepias and the Calamaries
is not precisely the same as in the Poulps, owing to the former having
no other mode of progression than by swimming, while the latter not
only swim but crawl. For in the former six of the feet are above the
teeth and small, the outer one on either side being the biggest; while
the remaining two, which make up the total weight, are below the mouth
and are the biggest of all, just as the hind limbs in quadrupeds are
stronger than the fore limbs. For it is these that have to support
the weight, and to take the main part in locomotion. And the outer
two of the upper six are bigger than the pair which intervene between
them and the uppermost of all, because they have to assist the lowermost
pair in their office. In the Poulps, on the other hand, the four central
feet are the biggest. Again, though the number of feet is the same
in all the Cephalopoda, namely eight, their length varies in different
kinds, being short in the Sepias and the Calamaries, but greater in
the Poulps. For in these latter the trunk of the body is of small
bulk, while in the former it is of considerable size; and so in the
one case nature has used the materials subtracted from the body to
give length to the feet, while in the other she has acted in precisely
the opposite way, and has given to the growth of the body what she
has first taken from the feet. The Poulps, then, owing to the length
of their feet, can not only swim but crawl, whereas in the other genera
the feet are useless for the latter mode of progression, being small
while the bulk of the body is considerable. These short feet would
not enable their possessors to cling to the rocks and keep themselves
from being torn off by the waves when these run high in times of storm;
neither would they serve to lay hold of objects at all remote and
bring them in; but, to supply these defects, the animal is furnished
with two long proboscises, by which it can moor itself and ride at
anchor like a ship in rough weather. These same processes serve also
to catch prey at a distance and to bring it to the mouth. They are
so used by both the Sepias and the Calamaries. In the Poulps the feet
are themselves able to perform these offices, and there are consequently
no proboscises. Proboscises and twining tentacles, with acetabula
set upon them, act in the same way and have the same structure as
those plaited instruments which were used by physicians of old to
reduce dislocations of the fingers. Like these they are made by the
interlacing of their fibres, and they act by pulling upon pieces of
flesh and yielding substances. For the plaited fibres encircle an
object in a slackened condition, and when they are put on the stretch
they grasp and cling tightly to whatever it may be that is in contact
with their inner surface. Since, then, the Cephalopoda have no other
instruments with which to convey anything to themselves from without,
than either twining tentacles, as in some species, or proboscises
as in others, they are provided with these to serve as hands for offence
and defence and other necessary uses. 

The acetabula are set in double line in all the Cephalopoda excepting
in one kind of poulp, where there is but a single row. The length
and the slimness which is part of the nature of this kind of poulp
explain the exception. For a narrow space cannot possibly admit of
more than a single row. This exceptional character, then, belongs
to them, not because it is the most advantageous arrangement, but
because it is the necessary consequence of their essential specific
constitution. 

In all these animals there is a fin, encircling the sac. In the Poulps
and the Sepias this fin is unbroken and continuous, as is also the
case in the larger calamaries known as Teuthi. But in the smaller
kind, called Teuthides, the fin is not only broader than in the Sepias
and the Poulps, where it is very narrow, but, moreover, does not encircle
the entire sac, but only begins in the middle of the side. The use
of this fin is to enable the animal to swim, and also to direct its
course. It acts, that is, like the rump-feathers in birds, or the
tail-fin in fishes. In none is it so small or so indistinct as in
the Poulps. For in these the body is of small bulk and can be steered
by the feet sufficiently well without other assistance. 

The Insects, the Crustacea, the Testacea, and the Cephalopoda, have
now been dealt with in turn; and their parts have been described,
whether internal or external. 

Part 10

We must now go back to the animals that have blood, and consider such
of their parts, already enumerated, as were before passed over. We
will take the viviparous animals first, and, we have done with these,
will pass on to the oviparous, and treat of them in like manner.

The parts that border on the head, and on what is known as the neck
and throat, have already been taken into consideration. All animals
that have blood have a head; whereas in some bloodless animals, such
as crabs, the part which represents a head is not clearly defined.
As to the neck, it is present in all the Vivipara, but only in some
of the Ovipara; for while those that have a lung also have a neck,
those that do not inhale the outer air have none. The head exists
mainly for the sake of the brain. For every animal that has blood
must of necessity have a brain; and must, moreover, for reasons already
given, have it placed in an opposite region to the heart. But the
head has also been chosen by nature as the part in which to set some
of the senses; because its blood is mixed in such suitable proportions
as to ensure their tranquillity and precision, while at the same time
it can supply the brain with such warmth as it requires. There is
yet a third constituent superadded to the head, namely the part which
ministers to the ingestion of food. This has been placed here by nature,
because such a situation accords best with the general configuration
of the body. For the stomach could not possibly be placed above the
heart, seeing that this is the sovereign organ; and if placed below,
as in fact it is, then the mouth could not possibly be placed there
also. For this would have necessitated a great increase in the length
of the body; and the stomach, moreover, would have been removed too
far from the source of motion and of concoction. 

The head, then, exists for the sake of these three parts; while the
neck, again, exists for the sake of the windpipe. For it acts as a
defence to this and to the oesophagus, encircling them and keeping
them from injury. In all other animals this neck is flexible and contains
several vertebrae; but in wolves and lions it contains only a single
bone. For the object of nature was to give these animals an organ
which should be serviceable in the way of strength, rather than one
that should be useful for any of the other purposes to which necks
are subservient. 

Continuous with the head and neck is the trunk with the anterior limbs.
In man the forelegs and forefeet are replaced by arms and by what
we call hands. For of all animals man alone stands erect, in accordance
with his godlike nature and essence. For it is the function of the
god-like to think and to be wise; and no easy task were this under
the burden of a heavy body, pressing down from above and obstructing
by its weight the motions of the intellect and of the general sense.
When, moreover, the weight and corporeal substance become excessive,
the body must of necessity incline towards the ground. In such cases
therefore nature, in order to give support to the body, has replaced
the arms and hands by forefeet, and has thus converted the animal
into a quadruped. For, as every animal that walks must of necessity
have the two hinder feet, such an animal becomes a quadruped, its
body inclining downwards in front from the weight which its soul cannot
sustain. For all animals, man alone excepted, are dwarf-like in form.
For the dwarf-like is that in which the upper part is large, while
that which bears the weight and is used in progression is small. This
upper part is what we call the trunk, which reaches from the mouth
to the vent. In man it is duly proportionate to the part below, and
diminishes much in its comparative size as the man attains to full
growth. But in his infancy the contrary obtains, and the upper parts
are large, while the lower part is small; so that the infant can only
crawl, and is unable to walk; nay, at first cannot even crawl, but
remains without motion. For all children are dwarfs in shape, but
cease to be so as they become men, from the growth of their lower
part; whereas in quadrupeds the reverse occurs, their lower parts
being largest in youth, and advance of years bringing increased growth
above, that is in the trunk, which extends from the rump to the head.
Thus it is that colts are scarcely, if at all, below full-grown horses
in height; and that while still young they can touch their heads with
the hind legs, though this is no longer possible when they are older.
Such, then, is the form of animals that have either a solid or a cloven
hoof. But such as are polydactylous and without horns, though they
too are of dwarf-like shape, are so in a less degree; and therefore
the greater growth of the lower parts as compared with the upper is
also small, being proportionate to this smaller deficiency.

Dwarf-like again is the race of birds and fishes; and so in fact,
as already has been said, is every animal that has blood. This is
the reason why no other animal is so intelligent as man. For even
among men themselves if we compare children with adults, or such adults
as are of dwarf-like shape with such as are not, we find that, whatever
other superiority the former may possess, they are at any rate deficient
as compared with the latter in intelligence. The explanation, as already
stated, is that their psychical principle is corporeal, and much impeded
in its motions. Let now a further decrease occur in the elevating
heat, and a further increase in the earthy matter, and the animals
become smaller in bulk, and their feet more numerous, until at a later
stage they become apodous, and extended full length on the ground.
Then, by further small successions of change, they come to have their
principal organ below; and at last their cephalic part becomes motionless
and destitute of sensation. Thus the animal becomes a plant, that
has its upper parts downwards and its lower parts above. For in plants
the roots are the equivalents of mouth and head, while the seed has
an opposite significance, for it is produced above it the extremities
of the twigs. 

The reasons have now been stated why some animals have many feet,
some only two, and others none; why, also, some living things are
plants and others animals; and, lastly, why man alone of all animals
stands erect. Standing thus erect, man has no need of legs in front,
and in their stead has been endowed by nature with arms and hands.
Now it is the opinion of Anaxagoras that the possession of these hands
is the cause of man being of all animals the most intelligent. But
it is more rational to suppose that his endowment with hands is the
consequence rather than the cause of his superior intelligence. For
the hands are instruments or organs, and the invariable plan of nature
in distributing the organs is to give each to such animal as can make
use of it; nature acting in this matter as any prudent man would do.
For it is a better plan to take a person who is already a flute-player
and give him a flute, than to take one who possesses a flute and teach
him the art of flute-playing. For nature adds that which is less to
that which is greater and more important, and not that which is more
valuable and greater to that which is less. Seeing then that such
is the better course, and seeing also that of what is possible nature
invariably brings about the best, we must conclude that man does not
owe his superior intelligence to his hands, but his hands to his superior
intelligence. For the most intelligent of animals is the one who would
put the most organs to use; and the hand is not to be looked on as
one organ but as many; for it is, as it were, an instrument for further
instruments. This instrument, therefore,-the hand-of all instruments
the most variously serviceable, has been given by nature to man, the
animal of all animals the most capable of acquiring the most varied
handicrafts. 

Much in error, then, are they who say that the construction of man
is not only faulty, but inferior to that of all other animals; seeing
that he is, as they point out, bare-footed, naked, and without weapon
of which to avail himself. For other animals have each but one mode
of defence, and this they can never change; so that they must perform
all the offices of life and even, so to speak, sleep with sandals
on, never laying aside whatever serves as a protection to their bodies,
nor changing such single weapon as they may chance to possess. But
to man numerous modes of defence are open, and these, moreover, he
may change at will; as also he may adopt such weapon as he pleases,
and at such times as suit him. For the hand is talon, hoof, and horn,
at will. So too it is spear, and sword, and whatsoever other weapon
or instrument you please; for all these can it be from its power of
grasping and holding them all. In harmony with this varied office
is the form which nature has contrived for it. For it is split into
several divisions, and these are capable of divergence. Such capacity
of divergence does not prevent their again converging so as to form
a single compact body, whereas had the hand been an undivided mass,
divergence would have been impossible. The divisions also may be used
singly or two together and in various combinations. The joints, moreover,
of the fingers are well constructed for prehension and for pressure.
One of these also, and this not long like the rest but short and thick,
is placed laterally. For were it not so placed all prehension would
be as impossible, as were there no hand at all. For the pressure of
this digit is applied from below upwards, while the rest act from
above downwards; an arrangement which is essential, if the grasp is
to be firm and hold like a tight clamp. As for the shortness of this
digit, the object is to increase its strength, so that it may be able,
though but one, to counterbalance its more numerous opponents. Moreover,
were it long it would be of no use. This is the explanation of its
being sometimes called the great digit, in spite of its small size;
for without it all the rest would be practically useless. The finger
which stands at the other end of the row is small, while the central
one of all is long, like a centre oar in a ship. This is rightly so;
for it is mainly by the central part of the encircling grasp that
a tool must be held when put to use. 

No less skilfully contrived are the nails. For, while in man these
serve simply as coverings to protect the tips of the fingers, in other
animals they are also used for active purposes; and their form in
each case is suited to their office. 

The arms in man and the fore limbs in quadrupeds bend in contrary
directions, this difference having reference to the ingestion of food
and to the other offices which belong to these parts. For quadrupeds
must of necessity bend their anterior limbs inwards that they may
serve in locomotion, for they use them as feet. Not but what even
among quadrupeds there is at any rate a tendency for such as are polydactylous
to use their forefeet not only for locomotion but as hands. And they
are in fact so used, as any one may see. For these animals seize hold
of objects, and also repel assailants with their anterior limbs; whereas
quadrupeds with solid hoofs use their hind legs for this latter purpose.
For their fore limbs are not analogous to the arms and hands of man.

It is this hand-like office of the anterior limbs which explains why
in some of the polydactylous quadrupeds, such as wolves, lions, dogs,
and leopards, there are actually five digits on each forefoot, though
there are only four on each hind one. For the fifth digit of the foot
corresponds to the fifth digit of the hand, and like it is called
the big one. It is true that in the smaller polydactylous quadrupeds
the hind feet also have each five toes. But this is because these
animals are creepers; and the increased number of nails serves to
give them a tighter grip, and so enables them to creep up steep places
with greater facility, or even to run head downwards. 

In man between the arms, and in other animals between the forelegs,
lies what is called the breast. This in man is broad, as one might
expect; for as the arms are set laterally on the body, they offer
no impediment to such expansion in this part. But in quadrupeds the
breast is narrow, owing to the legs having to be extended in a forward
direction in progression and locomotion. 

Owing to this narrowness the mammae of quadrupeds are never placed
on the breast. But in the human body there is ample space in this
part; moreover, the heart and neighbouring organs require protection,
and for these reasons this part is fleshy and the mammae are placed
upon it separately, side by side, being themselves of a fleshy substance
in the male and therefore of use in the way just stated; while in
the female, nature, in accordance with what we say is her frequent
practice, makes them minister to an additional function, employing
them as a store-place of nutriment for the offspring. The human mammae
are two in number, in accordance with the division of the body into
two halves, a right and a left. They are somewhat firmer than they
would otherwise be, because the ribs in this region are joined together;
while they form two separate masses, because their presence is in
no wise burdensome. In other animals than man, it is impossible for
the mammae to be placed on the breast between the forelegs, for they
would interfere with locomotion; they are therefore disposed of otherwise,
and in a variety of ways. Thus in such animals as produce but few
at a birth, whether horned quadrupeds or those with solid hoofs, the
mammae are placed in the region of the thighs, and are two in number,
while in such as produce litters, or such as are polydactylous, the
dugs are either numerous and placed laterally on the belly, as in
swine and dogs, or are only two in number, being set, however, in
the centre of the abdomen, as is the case in the lion. The explanation
of this latter condition is not that the lion produces few at a birth,
for sometimes it has more than two cubs at a time, but is to be found
in the fact that this animal has no plentiful supply of milk. For,
being a flesheater, it gets food at but rare intervals, and such nourishment
as it obtains is all expended on the growth of its body.

In the elephant also there are but two mammae, which are placed under
the axillae of the fore limbs. The mammae are not more than two, because
this animal has only a single young one at a birth; and they are not
placed in the region of the thighs, because they never occupy that
position in any polydactylous animal such as this. Lastly, they are
placed above, close to the axillae, because this is the position of
the foremost dugs in all animals whose dugs are numerous, and the
dugs so placed give the most milk. Evidence of this is furnished by
the sow. For she always presents these foremost dugs to the first-born
of her litter. A single young one is of course a first-born, and so
such animals as only produce a single young one must have these anterior
dugs to present to it; that is they must have the dugs which are under
the axillae. This, then, is the reason why the elephant has but two
mammae, and why they are so placed. But, in such animals as have litters
of young, the dugs are disposed about the belly; the reason being
that more dugs are required by those that will have more young to
nourish. Now it is impossible that these dugs should be set transversely
in rows of more than two, one, that is, for each side of the body,
the right and the left; they must therefore be placed lengthways,
and the only place where there is sufficient length for this is the
region between the front and hind legs. As to the animals that are
not polydactylous but produce few at a birth, or have horns, their
dugs are placed in the region of the thighs. The horse, the ass, the
camel are examples; all of which bear but a single young one at a
time, and of which the two former have solid hoofs, while in the last
the hoof is cloven. As still further examples may be mentioned the
deer, the ox, the goat, and all other similar animals. 

The explanation is that in these animals growth takes place in an
upward direction; so that there must be an abundant collection of
residual matter and of blood in the lower region, that is to say in
the neighbourhood of the orifices for efflux, and here therefore nature
has placed the mammae. For the place in which the nutriment is set
in motion must also be the place whence nutriment can be derived by
them. In man there are mammae in the male as well as in the female;
but some of the males of other animals are without them. Such, for
instance, is the case with horses, some stallions being destitute
of these parts, while others that resemble their dams have them. Thus
much then concerning the mammae. 

Next after the breast comes the region of the belly, which is left
unenclosed by the ribs for a reason which has already been given;
namely that there may be no impediment to the swelling which necessarily
occurs in the food as it gets heated, nor to the expansion of the
womb in pregnancy. 

At the extreme end of what is called the trunk are the parts concerned
in the evacuation of the solid and also of the fluid residue. In all
sanguineous animals with some few exceptions, and in all Vivipara
without any exception at all, the same part which serves for the evacuation
of the fluid residue is also made by nature to serve in sexual congress,
and this alike in male and female. For the semen is a kind of fluid
and residual matter. The proof of this will be given hereafter, but
for the present let it taken for granted. (The like holds good of
the menstrual fluid in women, and of the part where they emit semen.
This also, however, is a matter of which a more accurate account will
be given hereafter. For the present let it be simply stated as a fact,
that the catamenia of the female like the semen of the male are residual
matter. Both of them, moreover, being fluid, it is only natural that
the parts which serve for voidance of the urine should give issue
to residues which resemble it in character.) Of the internal structure
of these parts, and of the differences which exist between the parts
concerned with semen and the parts concerned with conception, a clear
account is given in the book of Researches concerning Animals and
in the treatises on Anatomy. Moreover, I shall have to speak of them
again when I come to deal with Generation. As regards, however, the
external shape of these parts, it is plain enough that they are adapted
to their operations, as indeed of necessity they must be. There are,
however, differences in the male organ corresponding to differences
in the body generally. For all animals are not of an equally sinewy
nature. This organ, again, is the only one that, independently of
any morbid change, admits of augmentation and of diminution of bulk.
The former condition is of service in copulation, while the other
is required for the advantage of the body at large. For, were the
organ constantly in the former condition, it would be an incumbrance.
The organ therefore has been formed of such constituents as will admit
of either state. For it is partly sinewy, partly cartilaginous, and
thus is enabled either to contract or to become extended, and is capable
of admitting air. 

All female quadrupeds void their urine backwards, because the position
of the parts which this implies is useful to them in the act of copulation.
This is the case with only some few males, such as the lynx, the lion,
the camel, and the hare. No quadruped with a solid hoof is retromingent.

The posterior portion of the body and the parts about the legs are
peculiar in man as compared with quadrupeds. Nearly all these latter
have a tail, and this whether they are viviparous or oviparous. For,
even if the tail be of no great size, yet they have a kind of scut,
as at any rate a small representative of it. But man is tail-less.
He has, however, buttocks, which exist in none of the quadrupeds.
His legs also are fleshy (as too are his thighs and feet); while the
legs in all other animals that have any, whether viviparous or not,
are fleshless, being made of sinew and bone and spinous substance.
For all these differences there is, so to say, one common explanation,
and this is that of all animals man alone stands erect. It was to
facilitate the maintenance of this position that Nature made his upper
parts light, taking away some of their corporeal substance, and using
it to increase the weight of lithe parts below, so that the buttocks,
the thighs, and the calves of the legs were all made fleshy. The character
which she thus gave to the buttocks renders them at the same time
useful in resting the body. For standing causes no fatigue to quadrupeds,
and even the long continuance of this posture produces in them no
weariness; for they are supported the whole time by four props, which
is much as though they were lying down. But to man it is no task to
remain for any length of time on his feet, his body demanding rest
in a sitting position. This, then, is the reason why man has buttocks
and fleshy legs; and the presence of these fleshy parts explains why
he has no tail. For the nutriment which would otherwise go to the
tail is used up in the production of these parts, while at the same
time the existence of buttocks does away with the necessity of a tail.
But in quadrupeds and other animals the reverse obtains. For they
are of dwarf-like form, so that all the pressure of their weight and
corporeal substance is on their upper part, and is withdrawn from
the parts below. On this account they are without buttocks and have
hard legs. In order, however, to cover and protect that part which
serves for the evacuation of excrement, nature has given them a tail
of some kind or other, subtracting for the purpose some of the nutriment
which would otherwise go to the legs. Intermediate in shape between
man and quadrupeds is the ape, belonging therefore to neither or to
both, and having on this account neither tail nor buttocks; no tail
in its character of biped, no buttocks in its character of quadruped.
There is great diversity of so-called tails; and this organ like others
is sometimes used by nature for by-purposes, being made to serve not
only as a covering and protection to the fundament, but also for other
uses and advantages of its possessor. 

There are differences in the feet of quadrupeds. For in some of these
animals there is a solid hoof, and in others a hoof cloven into two,
and again in others a foot divided into many parts. 

The hoof is solid when the body is large and the earthy matter present
in great abundance; in which case the earth, instead of forming teeth
and horns, is separated in the character of a nail, and being very
abundant forms one continuous nail, that is a hoof, in place of several.
This consumption of the earthy matter on the hoof explains why these
animals, as a rule, have no huckle-bones; a second reason being that
the presence of such a bone in the joint of the hind leg somewhat
impedes its free motion. For extension and flexion can be made more
rapidly in parts that have but one angle than in parts that have several.
But the presence of a huckle-bone, as a connecting bolt, is the introduction
as it were of a new limb-segment between the two ordinary ones. Such
an addition adds to the weight of the foot, but renders the act of
progression more secure. Thus it is that in such animals as have a
hucklebone, it is only in the posterior and not in the anterior limbs
that this bone is found. For the anterior limbs, moving as they do
in advance of the others, require to be light and capable of ready
flexion, whereas firmness and extensibility are what are wanted in
the hind limbs. Moreover, a huckle-bone adds weight to the blow of
a limb, and so renders it a suitable weapon of defence; and these
animals all use their hind legs to protect themselves, kicking out
with their heels against anything which annoys them. In the cloven-hoofed
quadrupeds the lighter character of the hind legs admits of there
being a huckle-bone; and the presence of the huckle-bone prevents
them from having a solid hoof, the bony substance remaining in the
joint, and therefore being deficient in the foot. As to the polydactylous
quadrupeds, none of them have huckle-bones. For if they had they would
not be polydactylous, but the divisions of the foot would only extend
to that amount of its breadth which was covered by the huckle-bone.
Thus it is that most of the animals that have huckle-bones are cloven-hoofed.

Of all animals man has the largest foot in proportion to the size
of the body. This is only what might be expected. For seeing that
he is the only animal that stands erect, the two feet which are intended
to bear all the weight of the body must be both long and broad. Equally
intelligible is it that the proportion between the size of the fingers
and that of the whole hand should be inverted in the case of the toes
and feet. For the function of the hands is to take hold of objects
and retain them by pressure; so that the fingers require to be long.
For it is by its flexed portion that the hand grasps an object. But
the function of the feet is to enable us to stand securely, and for
this the undivided part of the foot requires to be of larger size
than the toes. However, it is better for the extremity to be divided
than to be undivided. For in an undivided foot disease of any one
part would extend to the whole organ; whereas, if the foot be divided
into separate digits, there is not an equal liability to such an occurrence.
The digits, again, by being short would be less liable to injury.
For these reasons the feet in man are many-toed, while the separate
digits are of no great length. The toes, finally, are furnished with
nails for the same reason as are the fingers, namely because such
projecting parts are weak and therefore require special protection.

Part 11

We have now done with such sanguineous animals as live on land and
bring forth their young alive; and, having dealt with all their main
kinds, we may pass on to such sanguineous animals as are oviparous.
Of these some have four feet, while others have none. The latter form
a single genus, namely the Serpents; and why these are apodous has
been already explained in the dissertation on Animal Progression.
Irrespective of this absence of feet, serpents resemble the oviparous
quadrupeds in their conformation. 

In all these animals there is a head with its component parts; its
presence being determined by the same causes as obtain in the case
of other sanguineous animals; and in all, with the single exception
of the river crocodile, there is a tongue inside the mouth. In this
one exception there would seem to be no actual tongue, but merely
a space left vacant for it. The reason is that a crocodile is in a
way a land-animal and a water-animal combined. In its character of
land-animal it has a space for a tongue; but in its character of water-animal
it is without the tongue itself. For in some fishes, as has already
been mentioned, there is no appearance whatsoever of a tongue, unless
the mouth be stretched open very widely indeed; while in others it
is indistinctly separated from the rest of the mouth. The reason for
this is that a tongue would be of but little service to such animals,
seeing that they are unable to chew their food or to taste it before
swallowing, the pleasurable sensations they derive from it being limited
to the act of deglutition. For it is in their passage down the gullet
that solid edibles cause enjoyment, while it is by the tongue that
the savour of fluids is perceived. Thus it is during deglutition that
the oiliness, the heat, and other such qualities of food are recognized;
and, in fact, the satisfaction from most solid edibles and dainties
is derived almost entirely from the dilatation of the oesophagus during
deglutition. This sensation, then, belongs even to animals that have
no tongue, but while other animals have in addition the sensations
of taste, tongueless animals have, we may say, no other satisfaction
than it. What has now been said explains why intemperance as regards
drinks and savoury fluids does not go hand in hand with intemperance
as regards eating and solid relishes. 

In some oviparous quadrupeds, namely in lizards, the tongue is bifid,
as also it is in serpents, and its terminal divisions are of hair-like
fineness, as has already been described. (Seals also have a forked
tongue.) This it is which accounts for all these animals being so
fond of dainty food. The teeth in the four-footed Ovipara are of the
sharp interfitting kind, like the teeth of fishes. The organs of all
the senses are present and resemble those of other animals. Thus there
are nostrils for smell, eves for vision, and ears for hearing. The
latter organs, however, do not project from the sides of the head,
but consist simply of the duct, as also is the case in birds. This
is due in both cases to the hardness of the integument; birds having
their bodies covered with feathers, and these oviparous quadrupeds
with horny plates. These plates are equivalent to scales, but of a
harder character. This is manifest in tortoises and river crocodiles,
and also in the large serpents. For here the plates become stronger
than the bones, being seemingly of the same substance as these.

These animals have no upper eyelid, but close the eye with the lower
lid In this they resemble birds, and the reason is the same as was
assigned in their case. Among birds there are some that can not only
thus close the eye, but can also blink by means of a membrane which
comes from its corner. But none of the oviparous quadrupeds blink;
for their eyes are harder than those of birds. The reason for this
is that keen vision and far-sightedness are of very considerable service
to birds, flying as they do in the air, whereas they would be of comparatively
small use to the oviparous quadrupeds, seeing that they are all of
troglodytic habits. 

Of the two separate portions which constitute the head, namely the
upper part and the lower jaw, the latter in man and in the viviparous
quadrupeds moves not only upwards and downwards, but also from side
to side; while in fishes, and birds and oviparous quadrupeds, the
only movement is up and down. The reason is that this latter movement
is the one required in biting and dividing food, while the lateral
movement serve to reduce substances to a pulp. To such animals, therefore,
as have grinder-teeth this lateral motion is of service; but to those
animals that have no grinders it would be quite useless, and they
are therefore invariably without it. For nature never makes anything
that is superfluous. While in all other animals it is the lower jaw
that is movable, in the river crocodile it is exceptionally the upper.
This is because the feet in this creature are so excessively small
as to be useless for seizing and holding prey; on which account nature
has given it a mouth that can serve for these purposes in their stead.
For that direction of motion which will give the greater force to
a blow will be the more serviceable one in holding or in seizing prey;
and a blow from above is always more forcible than one from below.
Seeing, then, that both the prehension and the mastication of food
are offices of the mouth, and that the former of these two is the
more essential in an animal that has neither hands nor suitably formed
feet, these crocodiles will derive greater benefit from a motion of
the upper jaw downwards than from a motion of the lower jaw upwards.
The same considerations explain why crabs also move the upper division
of each claw and not the lower. For their claws are substitutes for
hands, and so require to be suitable for the prehension of food, and
not for its comminution; for such comminution and biting is the office
of teeth. In crabs, then, and in such other animals as are able to
seize their food in a leisurely manner, inasmuch as their mouth is
not called on to perform its office while they are still in the water,
the two functions are assigned to different parts, prehension to the
hands or feet, biting and comminution of food to the mouth. But in
crocodiles the mouth has been so framed by nature as to serve both
purposes, the jaws being made to move in the manner just described.

Another part present in these animals is a neck, this being the necessary
consequence of their having a lung. For the windpipe by which the
air is admitted to the lung is of some length. If, however, the definition
of a neck be correct, which calls it the portion between the head
and the shoulders, a serpent can scarcely be said with the same right
as the rest of these animals to have a neck, but only to have something
analogous to that part of the body. It is a peculiarity of serpents,
as compared with other animals allied to them, that they are able
to turn their head backwards without stirring the rest of the body.
The reason of this is that a serpent, like an insect, has a body that
admits of being curled up, its vertebrae being cartilaginous and easily
bent. The faculty in question belongs then to serpents simply as a
necessary consequence of this character of their vertebrae; but at
the same time it has a final cause, for it enables them to guard against
attacks from behind. For their body, owing to its length and the absence
of feet, is ill-suited for turning round and protecting the hinder
parts; and merely to lift the head, without the power of turning it
round, would be of no use whatsoever. 

The animals with which we are dealing have, moreover, a part which
corresponds to the breast; but neither here nor elsewhere in their
body have they any mammae, as neither has any bird or fish. This is
a consequence of their having no milk; for a mamma is a receptacle
for milk and, as it were, a vessel to contain it. This absence of
milk is not peculiar to these animals, but is common to all such as
are not internally viviparous. For all such produce eggs, and the
nutriment which in Vivipara has the character of milk is in them engendered
in the egg. Of all this, however, a clearer account will be given
in the treatise on Generation. As to the mode in which the legs bend,
a general account, in which all animals are considered, has already
been given in the dissertation on Progression. These animals also
have a tail, larger in some of them, smaller in others, and the reason
for this has been stated in general terms in an earlier passage.

Of all oviparous animals that live on land there is none so lean as
the Chamaeleon. For there is none that has so little blood. The explanation
of this is to be found in the psychical temperament of the creature.
For it is of a timid nature, as the frequent changes it undergoes
in its outward aspect testify. But fear is a refrigeration, and results
from deficiency of natural heat and scantiness of blood. We have now
done with such sanguineous animals as are quadrupedous and also such
as are apodous, and have stated with sufficient completeness what
external parts they possess, and for what reason they have them.

Part 12

The differences of birds compared one with another are differences
of magnitude, and of the greater or smaller development of parts.
Thus some have long legs, others short legs; some have a broad tongue,
others a narrow tongue; and so on with the other parts. There are
few of their parts that differ save in size, taking birds by themselves.
But when birds are compared with other animals the parts present differences
of form also. For in some animals these are hairy, in others scaly,
and in others have scale-like plates, while birds are feathered.

Birds, then, are feathered, and this is a character common to them
all and peculiar to them. Their feathers, too, are split and distinct
in kind from the undivided feathers of insects; for the bird's feather
is barbed, these are not; the bird's feather has a shaft, these have
none. A second strange peculiarity which distinguishes birds from
all other animals is their beak. For as in elephants the nostril serves
in place of hands, and as in some insects the tongue serves in place
of mouth, so in birds there is a beak, which, being bony, serves in
place of teeth and lips. Their organs of sense have already been considered.

All birds have a neck extending from the body; and the purpose of
this neck is the same as in such other animals as have one. This neck
in some birds is long, in others short; its length, as a general rule,
being pretty nearly determined by that of the legs. For long-legged
birds have a long neck, short-legged birds a short one, to which rule,
however, the web-footed birds form an exception. For to a bird perched
up on long legs a short neck would be of no use whatsoever in collecting
food from the ground; and equally useless would be a long neck, if
the legs were short. Such birds, again, as are carnivorous would find
length in this part interfere greatly with their habits of life. For
a long neck is weak, and it is on their superior strength that carnivorous
birds depend for their subsistence. No bird, therefore, that has talons
ever has an elongated neck. In web-footed birds, however, and in those
other birds belonging to the same class, whose toes though actually
separate have flat marginal lobes, the neck is elongated, so as to
be suitable for collecting food from the water; while the legs are
short, so as to serve in swimming. The beaks of birds, as their feet,
vary with their modes of life. For in some the beak is straight, in
others crooked; straight, in those who use it merely for eating; crooked,
in those that live on raw flesh. For a crooked beak is an advantage
in fighting; and these birds must, of course, get their food from
the bodies of other animals, and in most cases by violence. In such
birds, again, as live in marshes and are herbivorous the beak is broad
and flat, this form being best suited for digging and cropping, and
for pulling up plants. In some of these marsh birds, however, the
beak is elongated, as too is the neck, the reason for this being that
the bird get its food from some depth below the surface. For most
birds of this kind, and most of those whose feet are webbed, either
in their entirety or each part separately, live by preying on some
of the smaller animals that are to be found in water, and use these
parts for their capture, the neck acting as a fishing-rod, and the
beak representing the line and hook. 

The upper and under sides of the body, that is of what in quadrupeds
is called the trunk, present in birds one unbroken surface, and they
have no arms or forelegs attached to it, but in their stead wings,
which are a distinctive peculiarity of these animals; and, as these
wings are substitutes for arms, their terminal segments lie on the
back in the place of a shoulder-blade. 

The legs are two in number, as in man; not however, as in man, bent
outwards, but bent inwards like the legs of a quadruped. The wings
are bent like the forelegs of a quadruped, having their convexity
turned outwards. That the feet should be two in number is a matter
of necessity. For a bird is essentially a sanguineous animal, and
at the same time essentially a winged animal; and no sanguineous animal
has more than four points for motion In birds, then, as in those other
sanguineous animals that live and move upon the ground, the limbs
attached to the trunk are four in number. But, while in all the rest
these four limbs consist of a pair of arms and a pair of legs, or
of four legs as in quadrupeds, in birds the arms or forelegs are replaced
by a pair of wings, and this is their distinctive character. For it
is of the essence of a bird that it shall be able to fly; and it is
by the extension of wings that this is made possible. Of all arrangements,
then, the only possible, and so the necessary, one is that birds shall
have two feet; for this with the wings will give them four points
for motion. The breast in all birds is sharp-edged, and fleshy. The
sharp edge is to minister to flight, for broad surfaces move with
considerable difficulty, owing to the large quantity of air which
they have to displace; while the fleshy character acts as a protection,
for the breast, owing to its form, would be weak, were it not amply
covered. 

Below the breast lies the belly, extending, as in quadrupeds and in
man, to the vent and to the place where the legs are jointed to the
trunk. 

Such, then, are the parts which lie between the wings and the legs.
Birds like all other animals, whether produced viviparously or from
eggs, have an umbilicus during their development, but, when the bird
has attained to fuller growth, no signs of this remain visible. The
cause of this is plainly to be seen during the process of development;
for in birds the umbilical cord unites with the intestine, and is
not a portion of the vascular system, as is the case in viviparous
animals. 

Some birds, again, are well adapted for flight, their wings being
large and strong. Such, for instance, are those that have talons and
live on flesh. For their mode of life renders the power of flight
a necessity, and it is on this account that their feathers are so
abundant and their wings so large. Besides these, however, there are
also other genera of birds that can fly well; all those, namely, that
depend on speed for security, or that are of migratory habits. On
the other hand, some kinds of birds have heavy bodies and are not
constructed for flight. These are birds that are frugivorous and live
on the ground, or that are able to swim and get their living in watery
places. In those that have talons the body, without the wings, is
small; for the nutriment is consumed in the production of these wings,
and of the weapons and defensive appliances; whereas in birds that
are not made for flight the contrary obtains, and the body is bulky
and so of heavy weight. In some of these heavy-bodied birds the legs
are furnished with what are called spurs, which replace the wings
as a means of defence. Spurs and talons never co-exist in the same
bird. For nature never makes anything superfluous; and if a bird can
fly, and has talons, it has no use for spurs; for these are weapons
for fighting on the ground, and on this account are an appanage of
certain heavy-bodied birds. These latter, again, would find the possession
of talons not only useless but actually injurious; for the claws would
stick into the ground and interfere with progression. This is the
reason why all birds with talons walk so badly, and why they never
settle upon rocks. For the character of their claws is ill-suited
for either action. 

All this is the necessary consequence of the process of development.
For the earthy matter in the body issuing from it is converted into
parts that are useful as weapons. That which flows upwards gives hardness
or size to the beak; and, should any flow downwards, it either forms
spurs upon the legs or gives size and strength to the claws upon the
feet. But it does not at one and the same time produce both these
results, one in the legs, the other in the claws; for such a dispersion
of this residual matter would destroy all its efficiency. In other
birds this earthy residue furnishes the legs with the material for
their elongation; or sometimes, in place of this, fills up the interspaces
between the toes. Thus it is simply a matter of necessity, that such
birds as swim shall either be actually web-footed, or shall have a
kind of broad blade-like margin running along the whole length of
each distinct toe. The forms, then, of these feet are simply the necessary
results of the causes that have been mentioned. Yet at the same time
they are intended for the animal's advantage. For they are in harmony
with the mode of life of these birds, who, living on the water, where
their wings are useless, require that their feet shall be such as
to serve in swimming. For these feet are so developed as to resemble
the oars of a boat, or the fins of a fish; and the destruction of
the foot-web has the same effect as the destruction of the fins; that
is to say, it puts an end to all power of swimming. 

In some birds the legs are very long, the cause of this being that
they inhabit marshes. I say the cause, because nature makes the organs
for the function, and not the function for the organs. It is, then,
because these birds are not meant for swimming that their feet are
without webs, and it is because they live on ground that gives way
under the foot that their legs and toes are elongated, and that these
latter in most of them have an extra number of joints. Again, though
all birds have the same material composition, they are not all made
for flight; and in these, therefore, the nutriment that should go
to their tail-feathers is spent on the legs and used to increase their
size. This is the reason why these birds when they fly make use of
their legs as a tail, stretching them out behind, and so rendering
them serviceable, whereas in any other position they would be simply
an impediment. 

In other birds, where the legs are short, these are held close against
the belly during flight. In some cases this is merely to keep the
feet out of the way, but in birds that have talons the position has
a further purpose, being the one best suited for rapine. Birds that
have a long and a thick neck keep it stretched out during flight;
but those whose neck though long is slender fly with it coiled up.
For in this position it is protected, and less likely to get broken,
should the bird fly against any obstacle. 

In all birds there is an ischium, but so placed and of such length
that it would scarcely be taken for an ischium, but rather for a second
thigh-bone; for it extends as far as to the middle of the belly. The
reason for this is that the bird is a biped, and yet is unable to
stand erect. For if its ischium extended but a short way from the
fundament, and then immediately came the leg, as is the case in man
and in quadrupeds, the bird would be unable to stand up at all. For
while man stands erect, and while quadrupeds have their heavy bodies
propped up in front by the forelegs, birds can neither stand erect
owing to their dwarf-like shape, nor have anterior legs to prop them
up, these legs being replaced by wings. As a remedy for this Nature
has given them a long ischium, and brought it to the centre of the
body, fixing it firmly; and she has placed the legs under this central
point, that the weight on either side may be equally balanced, and
standing or progression rendered possible. Such then is the reason
why a bird, though it is a biped, does not stand erect. Why its legs
are destitute of flesh has also already been stated; for the reasons
are the same as in the case of quadrupeds. 

In all birds alike, whether web-footed or not, the number of toes
in each foot is four. For the Libyan ostrich may be disregarded for
the present, and its cloven hoof and other discrepancies of structure
as compared with the tribe of birds will be considered further on.
Of these four toes three are in front, while the fourth points backward,
serving, as a heel, to give steadiness. In the long-legged birds this
fourth toe is much shorter than the others, as is the case with the
Crex, but the number of their toes is not increased. The arrangement
of the toes is such as has been described in all birds with the exception
of the wryneck. Here only two of the toes are in front, the other
two behind; and the reason for this is that the body of the wryneck
is not inclined forward so much as that of other birds. All birds
have testicles; but they are inside the body. The reason for this
will be given in the treatise On the Generation of Animals.

Part 13

Thus then are fashioned the parts of birds. But in fishes a still
further stunting has occurred in the external parts. For here, for
reasons already given, there are neither legs nor hands nor wings,
the whole body from head to tail presenting one unbroken surface.
This tail differs in different fishes, in some approximating in character
to the fins, while in others, namely in some of the flat kinds, it
is spinous and elongated, because the material which should have gone
to the tail has been diverted thence and used to increase the breadth
of the body. Such, for instance, is the case with the Torpedos, the
Trygons, and whatever other Selachia there may be of like nature.
In such fishes, then, the tail is spinous and long; while in some
others it is short and fleshy, for the same reason which makes it
spinous and long in the Torpedo. For to be short and fleshy comes
to the same thing as to be long and less amply furnished with flesh.

What has occurred in the Fishing-frog is the reverse of what has occurred
in the other instances just given. For here the anterior and broad
part of the body is not of a fleshy character, and so all the fleshy
substance which has been thence diverted has been placed by nature
in the tail and hinder portion of the body. 

In fishes there are no limbs attached to the body. For in accordance
with their essential constitution they are swimming animals; and nature
never makes anything superfluous or void of use. Now inasmuch as fishes
are made swimming they have fins, and as they are not made for walking
they are without feet; for feet are attached to the body that they
may be of use in progression on land. Moreover, fishes cannot have
feet, or any other similar limbs, as well as four fins; for they are
essentially sanguineous animals. The Cordylus, though it has gills,
has feet, for it has no fins but merely has its tail flattened out
and loose in texture. 

Fishes, unless, like the Batos and the Trygon, they are broad and
flat, have four fins, two on the upper and two on the under side of
the body; and no fish ever has more than these. For, if it had, it
would be a bloodless animal. 

The upper pair of fins is present in nearly all fishes, but not so
the under pair; for these are wanting in some of those fishes that
have long thick bodies, such as the eel, the conger, and a certain
kind of Cestreus that is found in the lake at Siphae. When the body
is still more elongated, and resembles that of a serpent rather than
that of a fish, as is the case in the Smuraena, there are absolutely
no fins at all; and locomotion is effected by the flexures of the
body, the water being put to the same use by these fishes as is the
ground by serpents. For serpents swim in water exactly in the same
way as they glide on the ground. The reason for these serpent-like
fishes being without fins is the same as that which causes serpents
to be without feet; and what this is has been already stated in the
dissertations on the Progression and the Motion of Animals. The reason
was this. If the points of motion were four, motion would be effected
under difficulties; for either the two pairs of fins would be close
to each other, in which case motion would scarcely be possible, or
they would be at a very considerable distance apart, in which case
the long interval between them would be just as great an evil. On
the other hand, to have more than four such motor points would convert
the fishes into bloodless animals. A similar explanation applies to
the case of those fishes that have only two fins. For here again the
body is of great length and like that of a serpent, and its undulations
do the office of the two missing fins. It is owing to this that such
fishes can even crawl on dry ground, and can live there for a considerable
time; and do not begin to gasp until they have been for a considerable
time out of the water, while others, whose nature is akin to that
of land-animals, do not even do as much as that. In such fishes as
have but two fins it is the upper pair (pectorals) that is present,
excepting when the flat broad shape of the body prevents this. The
fins in such cases are placed at the head, because in this region
there is no elongation, which might serve in the absence of fins as
a means of locomotion; whereas in the direction of the tail there
is a considerable lengthening out in fishes of this conformation.
As for the Bati and the like, they use the marginal part of their
flattened bodies in place of fins for swimming. 

In the Torpedo and the Fishing-frog the breadth of the anterior part
of the body is not so great as to render locomotion by fins impossible,
but in consequence of it the upper pair (pectorals) are placed further
back and the under pair (ventrals) are placed close to the head, while
to compensate for this advancement they are reduced in size so as
to be smaller than the upper ones. In the Torpedo the two upper fins
(pectorals) are placed on the tail, and the fish uses the broad expansion
of its body to supply their place, each lateral half of its circumference
serving the office of a fin. 

The head, with its several parts, as also the organs of sense, have
already come under consideration. 

There is one peculiarity which distinguishes fishes from all other
sanguineous animals, namely, the possession of gills. Why they have
these organs has been set forth in the treatise on Respiration. These
gills are in most fishes covered by opercula, but in the Selachia,
owing to the skeleton being cartilaginous, there are no such coverings.
For an operculum requires fish-spine for its formation, and in other
fishes the skeleton is made of this substance, whereas in the Selachia
it is invariably formed of cartilage. Again, while the motions of
spinous fishes are rapid, those of the Selachia are sluggish, inasmuch
as they have neither fish-spine nor sinew; but an operculum requires
rapidity of motion, seeing that the office of the gills is to minister
as it were to expiration. For this reason in Selachia the branchial
orifices themselves effect their own closure, and thus there is no
need for an operculum to ensure its taking place with due rapidity.
In some fishes the gills are numerous, in others few in number; in
some again they are double, in others single. The last gill in most
cases is single. For a detailed account of all this, reference must
be made to the treatises on Anatomy, and to the book of Researches
concerning Animals. 

It is the abundance or the deficiency of the cardiac heat which determines
the numerical abundance or deficiency of the gills. For, the greater
an animal's heat, the more rapid and the more forcible does it require
the branchial movement to be; and numerous and double gills act with
more force and rapidity than such as are few and single. Thus, too,
it is that some fishes that have but few gills, and those of comparatively
small efficacy, can live out of water for a considerable time; for
in them there is no great demand for refrigeration. Such, for example,
are the eel and all other fishes of serpent-like form. 

Fishes also present diversities as regards the mouth. For in some
this is placed in front, at the very extremity of the body, while
in others, as the dolphin and the Selachia, it is placed on the under
surface; so that these fishes turn on the back in order to take their
food. The purpose of Nature in this was apparently not merely to provide
a means of salvation for other animals, by allowing them opportunity
of escape during the time lost in the act of turning-for all the fishes
with this kind of mouth prey on living animals-but also to prevent
these fishes from giving way too much to their gluttonous ravening
after food. For had they been able to seize their prey more easily
than they do, they would soon have perished from over-repletion. An
additional reason is that the projecting extremity of the head in
these fishes is round and small, and therefore cannot admit of a wide
opening. 

Again, even when the mouth is not placed on the under surface, there
are differences in the extent to which it can open. For in some cases
it can gape widely, while in others it is set at the point of a small
tapering snout; the former being the case in carnivorous fishes, such
as those with sharp interfitting teeth, whose strength lies in their
mouth, while the latter is its form in all such as are not carnivorous.

The skin is in some fishes covered with scales (the scale of a fish
is a thin and shiny film, and therefore easily becomes detached from
the surface of the body). In others it is rough, as for instance in
the Rhine, the Batos, and the like. Fewest of all are those whose
skin is smooth. The Selachia have no scales, but a rough skin. This
is explained by their cartilaginous skeleton. For the earthy material
which has been thence diverted is expended by nature upon the skin.

No fish has testicles either externally or internally; as indeed have
no apodous animals, among which of course are included the serpents.
One and the same orifice serves both for the excrement and for the
generative secretions, as is the case also in all other oviparous
animals, whether two-footed or four-footed, inasmuch as they have
no urinary bladder and form no fluid excretion. 

Such then are the characters which distinguish fishes from all other
animals. But dolphins and whales and all such Cetacea are without
gills; and, having a lung, are provided with a blow-hole; for this
serves them to discharge the sea-water which has been taken into the
mouth. For, feeding as they do in the water, they cannot but let this
fluid enter into their mouth, and, having let it in, they must of
necessity let it out again. The use of gills, however, as has been
explained in the treatise on Respiration, is limited to such animals
as do not breathe; for no animal can possibly possess gills and at
the same time be a respiratory animal. In order, therefore, that these
Cetacea may discharge the water, they are provided with a blow-hole.
This is placed in front of the brain; for otherwise it would have
cut off the brain from the spine. The reason for these animals having
a lung and breathing, is that animals of large size require an excess
of heat, to facilitate their motion. A lung, therefore, is placed
within their body, and is fully supplied with blood-heat. These creatures
are after a fashion land and water animals in one. For so far as they
are inhalers of air they resemble land-animals, while they resemble
water-animals in having no feet and in deriving their food from the
sea. So also seals lie halfway between land and water animals, and
bats half-way between animals that live on the ground and animals
that fly; and so belong to both kinds or to neither. For seals, if
looked on as water-animals, are yet found to have feet; and, if looked
on as land-animals, are yet found to have fins. For their hind feet
are exactly like the fins of fishes; and their teeth also are sharp
and interfitting as in fishes. Bats again, if regarded as winged animals,
have feet; and, if regarded as quadrupeds, are without them. So also
they have neither the tail of a quadruped nor the tail of a bird;
no quadruped's tail, because they are winted animals; no bird's tail,
because they are terrestrial. This absence of tail is the result of
necessity. For bats fly by means of a membrane, but no animal, unless
it has barbed feathers, has the tail of a bird; for a bird's tail
is composed of such feathers. As for a quadruped's tail, it would
be an actual impediment, if present among the feathers. 

Part 14

Much the same may be said also of the Libyan ostrich. For it has some
of the characters of a bird, some of the characters of a quadruped.
It differs from a quadruped in being feathered; and from a bird in
being unable to soar aloft and in having feathers that resemble hair
and are useless for flight. Again, it agrees with quadrupeds in having
upper eyelashes, which are the more richly supplied with hairs because
the parts about the head and the upper portion of the neck are bare;
and it agrees with birds in being feathered in all the parts posterior
to these. Further, it resembles a bird in being a biped, and a quadruped
in having a cloven hoof; for it has hoofs and not toes. The explanation
of these peculiarities is to be found in its bulk, which is that of
a quadruped rather than that of a bird. For, speaking generally, a
bird must necessarily be of very small size. For a body of heavy bulk
can with difficulty be raised into the air. 

Thus much then as regards the parts of animals. We have discussed
them all, and set forth the cause why each exists; and in so doing
we have severally considered each group of animals. We must now pass
on, and in due sequence must next deal with the question of their
generation. 

THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright statement:
The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-2000, Daniel
C. Stevenson, Web Atomics.
All rights reserved under international and pan-American copyright
conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part
in any form. Direct permission requests to classics@classics.mit.edu.
Translation of "The Deeds of the Divine Augustus" by Augustus is
copyright (C) Thomas Bushnell, BSG.
